UPCAT 2020 Reviewer
This reviewer is a property of The UPCAT Review. *Photocopying without the
permission of the authors and unauthorized use of the book is a crime. If caught, infractors
will be charged with violating the Intellectual Property Code and shall pay damages at a
cost higher than the book they want to reproduce. Rewards of up to Php 10,000 shall be
awarded to good samaritans who would report any incident of illegal reproduction of the
tome.

INSTRUCTIONS
Answer the questions with speed and accuracy. Make sure to always choose the best
answer for each question.

TIME ALLOTMENT OF TEST PARTS
Strictly follow the time table. Having your own time allotment will render this mock test
ineffective.
NO. OF ITEMS

TIME ALLOTMENT

12

6

12

10

MATHEMATICS

12

15

SCIENCE

12

12

SUBTEST
LANGUAGE
PROFICIENCY
READING
COMPREHENSION

Test Taking Strategies
Before delving into test taking strategies outlined below, we recommend reading and
familiarizing yourself with proven test preparation tips and strategies for improving test
performance, if you haven't already.
Once you have a solid command of the subject matter and material that will be
presented on your test, it's time to put in play some basic test taking strategies that have
proven effective for thousands of students. Remember, you must adapt test-taking
strategies to the specific type of test you're taking.

1. Be prepared
There is no substitute for preparation. If you haven't studied throughout the semester. If
you haven't reviewed prior to test day. If you don't know the test material, all the test
taking strategies in the world won't save you. Preparation is key.
•
•

Spend as many hours as necessary to understand the material that will be covered
on the test well enough to achieve a high score.
Since teachers often slightly modify information on tests to determine if students
have good understanding of concepts, spend time on honing test-taking skills.

2. Always arrive early and take a moment to relax
•
•
•

You'll increase your confidence if you take time to relax.
You'll be able to narrow your focus for the upcoming test.
Arriving early may allow you time to ask any last minutes questions of instructor or
listen to explanations being provided to other students. Some study resource
suggest that it's better to arrive on time to avoid "brain pickers", student who ask
questions right before a test, but we disagree. We believe there is more to be gained
by arriving a little early.

3. Listen attentively to last minute instructions
given by the instructor
•
•
•

It is not uncommon for teachers to alter test details at the last minute.
If you miss test instructions, test taking anxiety will increase.
If you miss test instructions, don't be scared to ask for instructions to be repeated.

4. Do a memory dump
A memory dump can be a particularly useful strategy for improving performance certain
types of tests.
•

As soon as you begin the test, write down information that you will likely need to
know for the test and you fear you may forget. (ie., formulas, equations, dates, lists,
etc.)

5. Read the test directions very carefully and
watch for details
•
•
•

Test questions and directions often contain valuable information. Always read all
directions carefully to ensure you understand what is being asked.
It is not uncommon to have two correct answers on a multiple choice question. Pay
attention to details.
Frequently, test instructions will notify students that they only need to complete two
questions, but there will be 5 options.

6. Plan how you will use the allotted time
•

•
•

Take a moment to estimate how must time you'll have for each section of the test
and each question. Allow enough time for more difficult sections or sections that are
weighted more heavily in the final test grade.
Pace yourself so you can complete the test in the allotted time frame.
Complete the questions you know first then come back and tackle the problems
you're not sure about after.

7. Look for cues
•
•

•

If two answers are similar, they're usually not the correct answer.
Pay attention to grammatical matching between the question being asked and
answers. If an answer seems right but doesn't match grammatically with the
question, it probably isn't the correct answer.
Look for cues from other questions.

8. Answer all the questions
Even if you're running out of time and can answer all the questions fully, it's important to
answer all questions. Many professors will give partial credit for partially completed
questions or if you're able to show your work. (Note: There are some tests in college
where you are docked points for guessing. This is rare and usually be announced by the
professor prior to the test.)

9. Maintain a positive attitude
•
•
•

Do not lose confidence or waste time if you encounter confusing or difficult
questions. Answer the questions you know first.
If you have no clue about the correct answer, make an educated guess if it will not
count against your score.
Disregard patterns. It is probably coincidence if a string of multiple choice answers
that you know are correct are "a."

10. Rely on your first impressions
•
•

The first answer that pops in your mind is usually the correct answer. Don't change
answers unless you're sure the answer you've chosen is wrong.
It may be counterproductive to review answers and make changes – especially if
you're struggling to get through the test.

11. Plan to finish early and have time for review
•
•
•

Go back and answer difficult questions after answering easy ones.
If you are required to complete an essay, review it for spelling and grammatical
errors.
Check to make sure you have completed the entire test. It is not uncommon for
questions to be listed on the opposite side of a page.

12. Consider every test a practice session analyze your performance
•
•
•
•

It takes time and practice to develop effective test taking skills.
To determine whether your test taking strategies are working, take time to evaluate
your performance after each test.
Be sure to take note of where you're struggling. Are you struggling with essays or
multiple choice questions?
Arrange to meet with teachers to discuss low test scores to determine what you can
do to improve. This is highly recommended if you struggle with essay questions.

Retrieved from https://www.educationcorner.com/test-taking-strategies.html

EXAM FOLLOWS

LANGUAGE PROFICIENCY
Directions: Read and analyze the paragraphs carefully. Choose the best answer that will
make each sentence correct according to formal and accepted Standard American
English.

Neither Billie __(1)__ Charles __(2)__ present at his birthday party. Because of
__(3)__ being a ruffian, he has no friends at all. He has been told a lot of times to be kind
toward his classmates. But he continues to hit on others. If I _(4)_, I would tie up the loose
ends and change my attitude.

1. A. or

B. and

C. either

D. nor

2. A. have

B. was

C. were

D. have been

3. A. he

B. his

C. him

D. you

4. A. was

B. were him

C. was him

D. were he

I took from their sconces two flambeaux, and giving one to Fortunato, bowed him
through several suites of rooms to the archway that led into the vaults. I passed down a
long and winding staircase, requesting him to be cautious as he followed. We came at
length to the foot of the descent, and stood together upon the damp ground of the
catacombs of the Montresors.
The gait of my friend was unsteady, and the bells upon his cap jingled as he
strode.
"The pipe," he said.
"It is farther on," said _1_; "but observe the white web-work which gleams from
these cavern walls."

He turned towards me, and looked into my eves with two filmy orbs that distilled
the rheum of intoxication.
"Nitre?" he asked, at length.
"Nitre," I replied. "How long _2_ you had that cough?"
"Ugh! ugh! ugh! --ugh! ugh! ugh! --ugh! ugh! ugh! --ugh! ugh! ugh! --ugh! ugh!
ugh!"
My poor friend found it impossible to reply for many minutes.
"It is nothing," he said, at last.
"Come," I said, with decision, "we will go back; your health is precious. You are
rich, respected, admired, beloved; you are happy, as once I was. You are a man to be
missed. For me it is no matter. We will go back; you will be ill, and I cannot be
responsible.__3__, there is Luchresi --"
(Excerpt from The Cask of Amontillado by Edgar Allan Poe)
1. A. me

B. we

C. am I

D. I

2. A. has

B. had

C. have

D. does

3. Asides

B. Aside

C. Besides

D. Beside

Directions: Each sentence contains errors in spelling, grammar, usage, punctuation,
and/or mechanics. Choose the letter of the underlined word which contains the error.
8. Henry differs from his friends in the matter of political preference. He has been a
A

B

member of the NPA since his last birthday. No error.
D

C

9. Mcduffin is my immediate boss. Whatever he instructs me to do, I would obey. I am
A
liable for him in case our business fails because of my wrongdoing. No error.
B

C

D

10. Your Call by Secondhand Serenade
Waiting for your call, I'm sick
Call, I'm angry
Call, I'm desperate for your voice
Listening to the song we used to sing in the car
A
Do you remember, Butterfly, Early Summer
It's playing on repeat
B
Just like when we would meet, like when we would meet
I was borne to tell you I love you,
C
And I am torn to do what I have to,
D
To make you mine
Stay with me tonight

11. An improvised explosive device was set at the Marcon Mall in Northsville. The bomb safety
A

B

unit have to diffuse the bomb before it explodes.
C

D

12. The gold bars were divided equally between Charles, Luchesi, Lemarque, and Aurelius.
A

B

C

No errors.
D

END OF LANGUAGE PROFICIENCY
The Tome of Knowledge: 2345 New Shortcuts and Techniques in English, Filipino, Science,
Mathematics, Logical Reasoning, and General Knowledge Tests College Entrance Test Reviewer is
the first and only book with a strategically-collated summary of all the important classroom lessons
you need to know before taking your admission exams.
This is the best book by far from The UPCAT Review. It is a lightyear ahead of our previous
Shortcuts and Techniques versions. Thousands of corrections and revisions are made from the
previous edition to spawn this one of a kind book. Each lesson is reexamined and revised to make
sure it is not passé. Also, new shortcuts and techniques are added based on the questions that
appeared on different college entrance tests last year. The Redesign is something not to miss for the
CET takers this year.
Shortcuts and Techniques That Really Work!
• Scientifically designed to help you learn faster
• Secret shortcuts to easily solve hard test problems
• Shortcuts used by quiz bee competitors
• Untaught and taught lessons included
• Bladder-rupturing science digest
• K to 12-aligned lessons
• Test-appearing examples
Proven
We do not rely on blatant misleading marketing to prove our book is effective and competitive. The
fact of the matter is that thousands of individuals covet our book because it is the most effective
single book reviewer available in the Philippines today. Stocks run out in a matter of minutes.
Release Date
We will have released the books by the third week of June 2019. Always keep posted. We will post
updates regularly.
How do I place an order?
Here is our Shopee online shop: https://bit.ly/2EPAEQO.
Here is the book reservation form: https://bit.ly/2XfLD0f
Here is our instructional video on how to order: http://bit.ly/2X8fjMT
The book is indeed, as our readers claim, ahead of its own time. Each shortcut is mind-blowing and
reading the whole tome will improve your exam scores exponentially and increase your chances of
getting accepted into your dream school. Most of the shortcuts and techniques here are NOT
TAUGHT IN A REGULAR CLASSROOM. It is better if you get yourself your own copy because
borrowing or lending books decreases the use efficiency by a huge margin. This will render the book
ineffective (interview with the past users who lent the book). Remember, there is not much time to
read 2345 shortcuts and techniques, so always have your book near your person.

READING COMPREHENSION
Directions: Read each selection carefully and answer the questions the follow.

Text I
“May patis na kami!” Isang nakakatuwang kwento ng isang Ibalonian ng napunta siya
at ang kanyang kapatid sa Gallup, New Mexico. Sa kalayu-layo ng Pilipinas, hanaphanap pa rin nila sa dulo ng mundo ang patis na walang katulad.
“Tatlong taon na ang orosipong ito pero tulad ng ibinubulong ng matandang salitang
Bikolnon para sa kwento – ang orosipon, hindi natatapos. Patuloy ang masayang
kwento: ang ating orosipon.” —RB, November 28, 2008, New York City
Hindi ko alam sa inyo pero para sa amin ng kapatid kong si Isang hindi maaaring
walang patis ang nilaga o sinigang. Imajinin nga ninyo – nilagang walang patis? Pede
ba iyon? Sinigang na walang patis? Mas lalong hindi pede.

Halos dalawang buwan na kami dito sa Gallup, New Mexico bago kami nagkaroon ng
patis. Kaming dalawa ang tinatawag na mga bagong salta. Nitong nakaraang August
10 lamang nang dumating kami dito sa Gallup, isang bayan na may isa’t kalahati
hangga’t dalawang oras na biyahe ang layo mula sa Albuquerque.

Noong unang linggo namin dito, sinubukan naming gawing Amerikano ang aming
tiyan. Tutal, pagyayabang namin sa sarili namin, sanay naman tayong kumain ng
Jollibee at Mcdonald’s sa Pilipinas. Sige, wheat bread at palaman. Pero hindi namin
nakumbinsi ang aming mga tiyan. Sari-saring tunog ang nililikha ng mga tiyan namin.
Brrrrrrrg. Mrrrrngk. Pop. Parang nagmumumog o kumukulog o pumuputok na mga
tunog ang maya’t maya’y naririnig namin mula sa mga tiyan namin.

Nang maglaon, tiyan na namin ang hindi mapakanali. Okey. Suko na kami. Kailangan
namin ng kanin at ulam! Sumugod kami sa nilalakad lang namin na supermarket (wala
kaming kotse). Diretso sa aisle ng bigas. Ok. Hayun, rice. Isang maliit na supot lang? Di

bale. Sige. Ano pa. Ulam.
Anong ulam natin? Nilagang baka para may mahigop na sabaw (nilalamig na agad kami
kahit na summer pa daw dito). Ok. Beef stew cuts. Ito na siguro iyon. Tapos repolyo.
Patatas. Carrots. Beans. Saging saba... walang saging na saba?! Ok, di bale. Sibuyas.
Tsek. Patis na lang.
Ah, ok sa condiments na tayo. Wala. Fish sauce. Hanap tayo ng fish sauce. Saan? Baka
kakaiba lang ang bote dito ng patis. Diyan sa shelf na iyan? Teka baka dito. Wala.
Walaaaa.

Doon namin naalala na usapin rin ng identidad ang panlasa. Pero, siyempre pa, ang
identidad ay likha ng taga-ngalan. Kailangang ikonteksto ang paghahanap ng patis sa
pananaw ng mga tagarito sa New Mexico. Sa madaling salita, sino ba kami sa pananaw
ng mga taga-rito?

Pinilit naming kalimutan na, basta tao kaming nagugutom. Alalahanin ang mga form
na sinusulatan. Please check ethnicity (optional). Oriental. Asian. Minsan may tiyak na
box para sa Filipino. O kaya, doon ka sa mga walang identitad: other. Ok, sikapin na
alalahanin hanapin ang karatulang may tanda ng identidad.

Dahil iniisip namin tiyak na may patis dito, kailangan lang nating matuklasan kung
nasaang aisle. May iba naman sigurong mga Pinoy dito. Siyempre mangangailangan
din sila ng patis. Elementary economics ba iyon? Ang alam ko, kung may demand, may
supply. Natitiyak naman namin na magdedemand ang mga dila ng mga Pinoy dito ng
patis, kaya mayroong magsu-supply. Luminga-linga kami. Binasa ang mga karatula sa
itaas ng mga aisle. Talagang wala. Walang Oriental food. O Asian food. O International
food. Ooops eto, Chinese food! Preno kami ng kapatid ko. Dalawang shelves na may
habang tatlong piye siguro. Pero walang patis. Walaaang patis! Bumili na lang kami ng
toyo sa isang kakaibang bote.

Kinabukasan, ibinalita sa akin ni Isang na ang sabi ng kaniyang katrabahong Chinese,
sa Albuquerque pa raw sila namimili ng oriental food. Whooaah! Sa Alburqeurque pa?

Para sa aming mga bagong saltang walang kotse, para na rin nilang sinabing sa
Pilipinas pa makakabili ng patis.

Pero tulad ng iba pang malilit na bahagi ng buhay migranteng bagong salta, unti-unti
nasanay na rin kaming magluto ng nilagang toyo ang pampaalat. Nasanay na rin
kaming umasa sa microwave na nabili namin sa halagang $10 sa isang yard sale:
pampainit ng tubig, ng kaning lamig at tirang ulam.

Nasanay na kaming gumamit ng mainit na tubig sa pagligo sa halip ng dati ay
hinahanap-hanap na malamig na tubig na pampaalis ng banas sa Pilipinas. Nasanay na
kaming ulit-ulitin ang aming sinasabi hanggang sa maintindihan ng kausap. Ng
pagbigkas ng salitang bank na halos behnk. Ng pagdala ng jacket saan man pumunta
dahil hindi nangangahulugang mainit ang panahon kahit na tirik na tirik ang araw. Ng
pagbitbit ng tigalawang galon ng inuming tubig mula sa supermarket. Ng matitigan
dahil sa kakaibang itsura o pananalita.

Naiintindihan siguro ng Diyos ang paghahanap namin sa patis. Isang araw, tumawag
ang Uncle Romy namin mula sa Norwalk, California. Oy, mga bagong saltang dalaga.
May pupunta diyan na mga Pinoy na madre. Pitong taon na sila diyan sa Gallup.
Ipinagbilin ko kayo.

Mga madreng misyonero na nagtuturo sa Catholic School dito sa Gallup. Na tulad ng
ibang migrante dito, natutong mag-drive! Dinala nila kaming magkapatid sa Philippine
Cuisine, isang bagong Pilipinong restaurant daw na may ilang bilihing Pilipino.
Ah! Para kaming mga batang nakakita ng mga kendi. Bumili kami ng patis, toyo, suka
(hindi distilled ha!), balat ng lumpiang shanghai, tumigas na sa lamig na tilapia, tinapa
at bihon!

Sa katunayan, hindi naman pala kami nag-iisa sa pananatiling Pinoy ng panlasa.
Sinubukan kong i-Google minsan ang humba dahil naalala ko ang masarap na pork
humba sa Rodic’s sa eskwelahang pinangungulilahan ko.

Aba! Sandamakmak na blogs at sites ang umapir! Pinoy. Pinay. Kung saan-saan.
Nananatiling Pinoy at Pinay nasaan man sila ngayon. Nagpapayabangan ng mga alam
na nilang lutuing Pinoy na dati-rati’y hindi pinapansin ang pagluluto at basta na
lamang kinakain sa kusina ng kanilang lola/lolo o nanay/tatay o sa kalapit na
karinderia.

Kaya ngayong tanghalian, habang balot ng medyas, pajama at sweater, hinihigop
namin ang mainit na sinigang na mayroon nang patis. Ang tanong naming dalawang
bagong migrante ngayon: anong bahagi ang hindi matitinag sa pag-iibang bayan?
1. Ano ang ibig sabihin ng “gawing Amerikano ang aming tiyan” sa akda?
a. Magpatatak sa tiyan ng Amerikanong bandila
b. Pandirihan ang lutuing Pinoy
c. Kumain ng banyagang pagkain
d. Masanay sa lutuin ng mga Amerikano

2. Anong sangkap ang hinahanap nila na nais nilang ihalo sa sinigang?
a. humba
b. patis
c. suka
d. tuba

3. Saang bansa nakapunta ang magkapatid?
a. Amerika
b. New Mexico
c. England
d. Mexico

4. Ano ang pangkalahatang emosyon ng akdang binasa?
a. Pagkasaya
b. Pagkagulat
c. Pagkainis
d. Pagkainip

5. Masasabing ang panlasa ay nagpapakita rin ng _____.
a. identidad
b. ugali
c. economic status
d. nararamdaman ng tao

6. Ano ang akmang pamagat ng kwento?
a. Kahit Saan Man, Ang Patis ay ‘Di Malimutan
b. Panlasang Pinoy sa Amerika
c. Patis: Ang Pambansang Sangkap sa Lutuing Pinoy
d. Pagkain ng OFW sa Banyagang Bansa

Text II
Hindi na siya maaaring ibangon
Ng mga pahinang naging pananggalang
Sa kahubdan at matinding gutom.
Maaari lamang siyang takpan ng mga iyon,
At ipagsanggalang sa mga langaw,
Sa huling pagkakataon.
Sapagkat musmos siyang nawalan ng pulso,
Wala na siyang panahon upang gagapin
Ang mga pangyayaring nagpapaikot sa mundo.

Marahil ay hahanapin siya sa pag-aalmusal
Ng mga taong nahirati sa pagbasa

Ng balitang kasing-init ng kape’t pandesal.
Sayang at di na niya masisilayan
(Sa kauna-unahang pagkakataon)
Ang sariling retratong naligaw
Sa espasyong batbat ng anunsiyo—
Newsboy na biktima ng isang kaskasero,
Gumulong ang ulo na parang sensilyo.

ni Lamberto Antonio
7. Ano ang ibig sabihin ng salitang “pananggalang” sa tula?
a. Pantapal

c. Proteksyon

b. Pantakip

d. Pampahid

8. Maaaring ilang taon na ang lalaking tinutukoy sa tula?
a. 3-6 taong gulang

c. 11-17 taong gulang

b. 7-11 taong gulang

d. 17-21 taong gulang

9. Maaaring ano ang ikinamatay ng newboy?
a. nasagasaan ng sasakyan

c. brain cancer

b. nabaril sa ulo

d. aksidente sa paglalaro

10. Ano ang akmang maging pamagat ng akda?
a. Sa Pagkamatay ng Isang Newsboy
b. Almusal sa Umaga
c. Retrato ng Musmos
d. Balita! Balita Kayo Diyan!

11. Ano ang pangkalahatang emosyon ng tula?
a. Pagkagalit

c. Pagluluksa

b. Pagkapighati

d. Panghihinayang

12. Ano ang sensilyo?
a. bagay na ginagamit sa pananalapi
b. bagay na ginagamit sa sasakyan
c. bagay na ginagamit sa basketbol
d. bagay na ginagamit sa gantsilyo

END OF READING COMPREHENSION
The Tome of Knowledge: 2345 New Shortcuts and Techniques in English, Filipino, Science,
Mathematics, Logical Reasoning, and General Knowledge Tests College Entrance Test Reviewer is
the first and only book with a strategically-collated summary of all the important classroom lessons
you need to know before taking your admission exams.
This is the best book by far from The UPCAT Review. It is a lightyear ahead of our previous
Shortcuts and Techniques versions. Thousands of corrections and revisions are made from the
previous edition to spawn this one of a kind book. Each lesson is reexamined and revised to make
sure it is not passé. Also, new shortcuts and techniques are added based on the questions that
appeared on different college entrance tests last year. The Redesign is something not to miss for the
CET takers this year.
Shortcuts and Techniques That Really Work!
• Scientifically designed to help you learn faster
• Secret shortcuts to easily solve hard test problems
• Shortcuts used by quiz bee competitors
• Untaught and taught lessons included
• Bladder-rupturing science digest
• K to 12-aligned lessons
• Test-appearing examples
Proven
We do not rely on blatant misleading marketing to prove our book is effective and competitive. The
fact of the matter is that thousands of individuals covet our book because it is the most effective
single book reviewer available in the Philippines today. Stocks run out in a matter of minutes.
Release Date
We will have released the books by the third week of June 2019. Always keep posted. We will post
updates regularly.
How do I place an order?
Here is our Shopee online shop: https://bit.ly/2EPAEQO.
Here is the book reservation form: https://bit.ly/2XfLD0f
Here is our instructional video on how to order: http://bit.ly/2X8fjMT
The book is indeed, as our readers claim, ahead of its own time. Each shortcut is mind-blowing and
reading the whole tome will improve your exam scores exponentially and increase your chances of
getting accepted into your dream school. Most of the shortcuts and techniques here are NOT
TAUGHT IN A REGULAR CLASSROOM. It is better if you get yourself your own copy because
borrowing or lending books decreases the use efficiency by a huge margin. This will render the book
ineffective (interview with the past users who lent the book). Remember, there is not much time to
read 2345 shortcuts and techniques, so always have your book near your person.

MATHEMATICS
Directions: Analyze each item carefully. Find the correct answer from the four
choices.

1. Which of the following has the lowest value?

𝑎)

1
2

𝑏)

31
6

3

𝑏)

𝑐)

5

4

2. Calculate

𝑎)

3

3

𝑑)

4

3

7

2

4

12

𝑐)

3

10

5

+ + +

61

7

3

𝑑)

31

.
1
12

3. The sum of four consecutive integers is 58. What is the value of the second

lowest integer?
a)14

b)13

c)11

d)12
2

3

8

2

4. What is the value of ( 𝑥10−2 ) − ( 𝑥10−3 ) ?

a)0.01

b)0.0025

c)0.001

d)0.035

5. Eight consecutive integers are given. The sum of the first six is 75. What is the

average of the last two integers?
a) 14 b)15.5 c)16.5 d)17

6. Five year ago, Tim is twice as old as Joshua. But currently, Joshua is just ten

years younger than Tim. How old is Tim three years ago?
a) 20

b)12

7. Solve for x if

c)22
3
2𝑥+1
1

d)24

> −1.

a) (−∞, −2) ∪ (− 2 , +∞) b) (−2, +∞)

c) (−∞, −1) ∪ (1, +∞)

d) (−∞, −2)

8. The length of the diagonal of a square is 4cm, how long is one of its sides?

a) 2 b) 2√2

c) √2/2

d) √2

9. What is the area of a circle inscribed

in a square with a side length of 6cm?
a) 3𝜋 𝑐𝑚2 b) 6𝜋 𝑐𝑚2

6cm

c) 9𝜋 𝑐𝑚2 d) 12𝜋 𝑐𝑚2

10. What is the surface area of a sphere

having a radius of 5m?

r

a) 75𝜋 𝑚2 b) 100𝜋 𝑚2 c) 25𝜋 𝑚2 d) 40 𝑚2
50°

11. Find the value of the angle x

a)30

b)50

c) 80

x

d)40

30°

12. Kenneth can finish a job in 5 hours and Leonard can finish a job in 8 hours. If

they work together, how many hours would it take for them to finish a job?
1

a) 3 3

1

b) 2 2

c) 3

d) 4

END OF MATHEMATICS

SCIENCE
Directions: Analyze each item carefully. Find the correct answer from the four
choices.
1. Deuterium is known to be a stable hydrogen isotope. What is its atomic mass?

𝑎)1

𝑏)2

𝑐)3

𝑑)4

2. Which of the following pH values represents the strongest base?

𝑎)10

𝑏)2

𝑐)13

𝑑)7

3. What is the molecular formula for potassium chloride?

a)KCl

b)KClO3

c)LiCl

d)LiClO3

4. It is the movement of water molecules through a plasma membrane from a

region of low concentration to a region of high concentration.
a) Active Transport

b) Passive Transport

c) Osmosis

d) Diffusion

5. A step in mitosis where the chromosomes are aligned vertically at the center of

the cell. The centrosome move into the opposite sides of the cell then produces
spindle fibers attaching the chromosome.
a) Prophase

b) Metaphase

c) Anaphase

d) Telophase

6. Professor of physiology at the University of Belgium. He studied several slides of

animal tissues in which he stated that animals are composed of cells.
a) Robert Hooke
b) Matthias Jakob Schleiden
c) Leeuwenhoek
d) Theodor Schwann
7. It is the unit of electrical current in SI.

a) candela

b) joules

c) ampere

d) watts

8. The change of a gas or vapor to a liquid, either by cooling or by being subjected

to increased pressure.
a) Condensation

b) Evaporation

c) Conduction

d) precipitation

9. This states that our Sun burst, and all out planets came from it.

a) Fission Theory

b) Capture Theory

c) Accretion Theory

d) Stellar Collision Theory

10. It is located at the boundary between inner and outer core.

a) Mantle

b) Lehmann Discontinuity

c) Mohorovičić discontinuity

d) Gutenberg Discontinuity

11. A ball is dropped from rest on a 30 m tall building. Ignoring air resistance, what is

its speed just before it hits the ground? (Let the acceleration due to gravity be
9.8)
a) √588 m/s
b) √430 m/s
c) √245 m/s
d) √326 m/s

12. An object experiences a net force of F, causing it to accelerate with a magnitude

of a. If the same object experiences twice the net force, what is the new
acceleration?
a) a

b) 2a

c) 4a

d) 6a

17 June 2019

The Key to Correction will be posted on The UPCAT Review official Facebook group.
To access the file, join us here: https://www.facebook.com/groups/2285383484870501/

The questions in this MOCK UPCAT TEST are based on previous test-appearing
questions as recalled by past takers and passers. Grab your copy of our official
reviewer here: https://shopee.ph/Tome-of-Knowledge-Catalog-Book-Envelope-2345New-Shortcuts-and-Techniques-Official-Releasei.74790835.2246756497?fbclid=IwAR0Mlq5N9Ck_S2TRAojmUiBkfmoMScp2A85HxL4D
eXSIfVNNQnLZGSOrt78

This is owned by The UPCAT Review.
FB: www.fb.com/upcatreviewer
Website: www.theupcatreview.com

AD MAJOREM DEI GLORIAM!

