UPCAT Reviewer

Arranged by:
JAZZVER O. SANCHEZ

NOT FOR SALE (Last updated: May 22, 2020)

As you take this, have pieces of paper and pen/pencil with you.
Practice lang ng practice
Dear future scholar,
While I was in my undergraduate years, nagpapart-time tutor ako ng mga
graduating SHS para sa pagrereview nila sa CETs and fortunately nalalampasan
naman nila. Ngayon na may full time work na ako as a Physics Teacher, hindi ko
na magagawang maglaan ng oras para magpart time ng reviews. Perhaps
napag-isipan ko ito bilang paraan sa pagtulong sa inyong nagrereview until
naging advocacy ko na ang tumulong sa mga kagaya niyo. So, claim this copy
for FREE.
Ngayon, may simple request lang sana ako. Subscribe ka sa youtube channel
ko.
Youtube Channel: Agham Liknayan
Link: http://www.youtube.com/c/AghamLiknayan
CETs Playlist:
https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCnXzPZQ9TF4c2xnms2qPPhw/playlists?vie
w_as=subscriber
Nag-uupload ako ng academic tutorial videos dito, mock exams, and I can even
upload things like tips on studying CETs, etc. Kapag sa kalagitnaan ng pag-aaral
mo ay may request kang tutorial na ipa-upload, sabihin mo lang sa akin through
comments or message/email.
Join ka na rin sa facebook group na ito for updates and exchanging of ideas
Group name: UPCAT and other College Entrance Tests (CETs) Reviewers 2020
Group link: https://www.facebook.com/groups/846957139104695/
And finally, ang bagay lang na maipapangako ko ay tutulungan kita sa makakaya
ko. So feel free to message/email me for questions.
Magtiwala ka sa sarili mo, and make the ones you love proud!
NOT FOR SALE (Last updated: May 22, 2020)

UPCAT Complete Reviewer
Arranged by: Jazzver O. Sanchez
Detailed solutions for Math are solved by: JAZZVER O. SANCHEZ
For any questions or clarifications, you may send an email at
jazzversanchez@gmail.com
Facebook Group: https://www.facebook.com/groups/846957139104695/
Youtube: http://www.youtube.com/c/AghamLiknayan

I made this FREE for everyone. Hoping that you will pass the
exam of your university choice. Have the very best of luck
Note that this is just a reviewer and cannot guarantee of passing the
UPCAT. The passages used in this mock-exam do not necessarily
reflect my personal opinions. This is a compilation of materials
gathered from various books and electronic sources. I don’t claim
copyright on materials and examples taken from references. For the
mathematics part, I am going to provide the detailed solutions at the end of
the page as well as its complete video tutorials.

Contents
Nos. 1-85
Nos. 86-175
Nos. 176-235
Nos. 236-295

Language Proficiency
Reading Comprehension
Science
Mathematics

NOT FOR SALE (Last updated: May 22, 2020)

85 questions
90 questions
60 questions
60 questions

50 minutes
70 minutes
50 minutes
75 minutes

These inspirational quotes might boost your mood in taking this mock-exam.
“Success is not final; failure is not fatal; it is the courage to continue that
counts”
“Allow yourself to be a beginner. No one starts off being excellent.”
“Push yourself because no one else is going to do it for you.”
“Be one of those rare people who step over their insecurities and succeed.”
“FEAR – Forget Everything and Run … or … Face Everything and Rise. It’s
your choice.”
“Behind every unsuccessful person, there are a lot of unsuccessful years.”
“The secret to getting ahead is getting started.”
“A year from now you’ll wish you had STARTED TODAY.”
“A little progress each day adds up to big results.”
“Don’t let yesterday take up too much of today.”
“If you don’t sacrifice for what you want, what you want becomes the
sacrifice.”
“STUDY while others are sleeping; WORK while others are loafing;
PREPARE while others are playing; DREAM while others are wishing”
“A journey of thousand miles begins with a single step.”
“There is no elevator to success, you have to take the stairs.”
“Success doesn’t come from what you do OCCASSIONALLY, it comes from
what you do CONSISTENTLY.”
“Nothing will work unless you do.”
“Mistakes are proof that you are trying.”
“Yes, though I walk through the valley of the shadow of death, I will fear no
evil: for you are with me. (Psalm 23:4)”
“I can do everything through Christ who gives me strength. (Philippians
4:13)”
I am wishing all the best for you. Good luck and God Bless

NOT FOR SALE (Last updated: May 22, 2020)

LANGUAGE
PROFICIENCY

NOT FOR SALE (Last updated: May 22, 2020)

Error Identification. These sentences will test your ability to recognize
grammar or usage errors. There are three/four underlined portions that may
contain errors and a fourth/fifth portion which indicates that the phrase has
no error. Select the letter of the underlined portion that has an error. There
is no more than one error in every item.
1. The new government was drafting a constitution, electing a legislative
A
B
body and established diplomatic relations. No error.
C
D
2. Neither Senate or Congress wants to pass the bill suggested by the
A
B
C
President. No error.
D
3. He went into his room, closed the door, opened the window and goes to bed. No
A
B
C
error.
D
4. When you pass the UPCAT, one should be proud. No error.
A B
C
D
5. Everyone in our family except my brother and I has eaten lunch. No error.
A
B C D
E
6. Hearing the news the whole group went to the province. No error.
A
B
C
D
E
7. Science refer to that dynamic, cumulative systems of verifiable concepts and
A
B
C
processes which seek to understand natural phenomena. No error.
D
E
8. The resuscitation of multiple victims of the tsunamis have kept the death toll to a
A
B
minimum. No error.
C
D
NOT FOR SALE (Last updated: May 22, 2020)

9. None of the players in the locker room were able to comprehend or to solved the
A
B
C
problem. No error.
D
E
10. A number of optional sections have been included. No error.
A
B
C
D
E
11. To enjoy all rewards and privileges, please present these card when purchasing
A
B
C
D
at the store. No error.
E
12. Sitting along the beach across the clinic, Lito wondered what he was suppose to
A
B
C
D
do. No error.
E
13. I guess he sat down resting in the shade and never got up again. No error.
A
B
C
D
E
14. Some scientists consider Sergey Koryolev’s rockets to be more revolutionary
A
B
than Von Braun of NASA. No error.
C
D
15. As passionate students, Jelay and May plan to become a passer of the upcoming
A
B
C
UPCAT. No error.
D
16. Natatakpan ng kadiliman ang iba’t-ibang makukulay na larawan. Walang mali.
A
B
C
D
17. Napag-alaman na nakipagsabwatan siya sa kanyang tauhan upang maikubli ang
A
B
C
katiwaliang kanyang ginawa. Walang mali.
D
NOT FOR SALE (Last updated: May 22, 2020)

18. When I called you up this morning, what are you doing? No error.
A
B C
D
E
19. As dedicated teachers, Kate and Sophia plans to become members of the
A
B
volunteer teaching team. No error.
C
D
20. Some of the boys who plays basketball also like to play football. No error.
A
B
C
D
21. Hindi bumoboto doon si manong Jose dahil mahaba ang pila. Walang mali.
A
B
C
D
22. Kundi man ngayon makaluwas si Jorge sa Maynila, ay sa Agosto pa siya
A
B
luluwas. Walang mali.
C
D
23. He was quite amusing when he heard what had happened. No error.
A
B
C
D
E
24. He stopped to see if he could picked up the trail. No error.
A
B
C
D
E
25. Either Lisa or Karen will always volunteer their valuable time to serve on our
A
B
C
D
board. No error.
E
26. Work as quick as you can but as carefully as possible when you take the test. No
A
B
C
D
error.
E
27. Professor Lane, our Computer Science teacher, was excited when he had the
A
B
opportunity to meet Bill Gates, the president of Microsoft, Inc. No error.
C
D
E
NOT FOR SALE (Last updated: May 22, 2020)

28. The conversation with her mother had a more profound affect on her than she
A
B
C
D
expected. No error.
E
29. The radically polarized sections of the society are no good to anyone. No error.
A
B
C
D
30. The then Prime Minister had issued an order though he was not supposedly to.
A
B
C
No error.
D

VOCABULARY. Select the word/s that best capture the meaning of the underlined
word.

31. The first permanent tooth usually appears about four years after the baby teeth
have erupted.
a.) exploded

b.) broken out

c.) burst out

d.) emerged

32. The professor took an immaculate handkerchief out of his pocket, and began to
polish the lenses of his glasses.
a.) pure

b.) spotless

c.) error-free

d.) flawless

33. Maraming natutuwa kay Aling Lena dahil sa kanyang mabusilak na puso.
a.) mapula
b.) madugo

c.) malinis
d.) maramdamin

34. Alab ng puso
a.) pighati
b.) sakit

35. Pasan ko ang daigdig
NOT FOR SALE (Last updated: May 22, 2020)

c.) damdamin
d.) poot

a.) dala-dala
b.) natatanaw

c.) problema
d.) kasalanan

36. The book Crime and Punishment is considered by many to be Dostoevsky’s
magnus opus.
a.) greatest work
b.) favorite

c.) longest work
d.) achievement

37. Communism is considered as the antithesis of capitalism.
a.) opponent
b.) opposite

c.) raconteur
d.) depredation

38. No person could articulate his ideas better than the council president.
a.) say
b.) present

c.) organize
d.) translate

39. Much of his writing is slack that is why readers get bored at his works.
a.) lacks action
b.) lacks completeness/perfection

c.) lacks firmness
d.) lacks diligence

40. The gases trapped in pasty lava do not escape freely and may sometimes break
out with explosive violence.
a.) sudden
b.) expressive

c.) unrestrained
d.) volatile

41. In the U.K. the name of the Scottish city Edinburgh, in the vernacular, is actually
pronounced as “E-din-burrah”
a.) Native Language or Dialect
b.) Local Slang
NOT FOR SALE (Last updated: May 22, 2020)

c.) Peculiar manner
d.) Surrounding area

42. The Apotheosis of Washington is a unique work of art that can be found in the
U.S. Capitol.
a.) Glorification

b.) Deification

c.) Inauguration

d.) Archetype

43. Leo made a disappointed, misunderstood face, from the many creases at his
disposal.
a.) authority

b.) distribution

c.) garbage unit

d.) regulation

44. The nomadic Mongols lived in yurts since the days of Genghis Khan.
a.) Tents

b.) Houses

c.) Caravans

d.) Wagons

45. The defendant was acquitted by the court in yesterday’s hearing.
a.) arrested

b.) absolved

c.) convicted

d.) released

46. Joanna’s reply to his query was sure and crisp, that it didn’t took too long before
she was able to prod him away.
a.) brittle

b.) lively

c.) concise

d.) fragile

47. Artifice was one of the qualities of style that was worthy of further cultivation.
a.) fostering of growth
b.) refinement

c.) development
d.) elevation

48. Biscuits had been stamped on the floor, making mopping more laborious than it
already is.
a.) crushed

b.) impressed

c.) pounded

d.) imprinted

49. Please depress the red button when you’re ready.
a.) press down

b.) repress

c.) discourage

d.) weaken

50. Naniniktik ang mga Espanyol sa mga posisyon ng mga Katipunero.
a.) Umaatake

b.) Nanghihimasok

NOT FOR SALE (Last updated: May 22, 2020)

c.) Nag-eespiya

d.) Sumusugod

51. Hindi napukaw ang atensyon ng mga manonood ng bagong kanta.
a.) nakuha

b.) naantala

c.) nasik

d.) nagulat

52. Si Salvi ang may pasimuno ng lahat ng ito.
a.) tumigil

b.) nagsimula

c.) nagpakalat

d.) naghasik

53. The shaft that kept the roof up stayed rigid, even as the wind and rain gained
strength.
a.) Pliable

b.) Flaccid

c.) Firm

d.) Flexible

54. Back in her time, Margaret Thatcher was an eminent world leader, although she
was very unpopular with the U.K.’s leftist north.
a.) famous

b.) obscure

c.) unimportant

d.) articulate

55. In medieval England, papists, or Catholics, could be obtruncated if caught.
a.) deported

b.) beheaded

c.) tortured

d.) imprisoned

56. George Orwell brilliantly portrayed a socialist dystopia in his book 1984.
a.) Fable

b.) Anti-utopia

c.) Myth

d.) Utopia

57. As a result of inbreeding, some members of the Russian Imperial household
suffered from hemophilia.
a.) Bloodthirstiness
b.) Infertility

c.) Uncontrollable Bleeding
d.) Mental Disorders

58. One week later, the vessel deposited them in one of the biggest ports on the
Eastern Peninsula.
a.) consigned

b.) dropped

c.) credit

d.) accumulated

59. Madalas kang makakakita ng sambalilo sa ulo ng kinakalbong si Padre
Francisco.
NOT FOR SALE (Last updated: May 22, 2020)

a.) Sombrero
b.) Kapa

c.) Huwad na buhok
d.) Takip sa ulo ng mga pari

60. By the end of the century, mass circulation of newspapers had been developed.
a.) movement of blood through veins and capillaries c.) distribution of copies
b.) dissemination
d.) availability in libraries
SENTENCE COMPLETION. Select the word or phrase that most appropriately
completes the sentence.
61. The police officer
would get hurt.
a.) undulated

the crowd to step back from the fire so that no one

b.) enjoined

c.) stagnated

d.) permeated

62. Bea was known for her loud and domineering personality and was considered a
by many who knew her.
a.) banality

b.) debutante

c.) virago

d.) trifle

63. Nothing will
my memory of the night we first met; the images are
forever burned in my mind.
a.) appease

b.) undulate

c.) inculcate

64. Sheila’s grueling hike included passing through numerous
a.) terrariums

b.) neoprene

65. The artist attempted to
bright colors in the foreground.
a.) excoriate
66. The
field.
a.) starling

b.) amplify

c.) jurisdictions

d.) efface
.
d.) ravines

the painting by adding people dressed in

c.) eradicate

d.) vivify

deer stuck close to its mother when venturing out into the open

b.) foundling

NOT FOR SALE (Last updated: May 22, 2020)

c.) yearling

d.) begrudging

67. David’s
entrance on stage disrupted the scene and caused the actors
to flub their lines.
a.) untimely

b.) precise

c.) lithe

d.) fortuitous

68. Calvin reached the
of his career in his early thirties when he became
president and CEO of a software company.
a.) zephyr

b.) zenith

c.) vale

d.) nocturne

69. Genevieve’s stunning debut performance at the city opera has earned her
from some of the city’s toughest critics.
a.) antipathy

b.) accolades

c.) destitutions

d.) lamentations

70. Prince Phillip had to choose: marry the woman he loved and
the throne, or marry Fiona and inherit the crown.
a.) reprimand

b.) upbraid

c.) abdicate

71. Ming’s blatant lie revealed that he suffered no
to his parents.
a.) compunction

b.) repudiation

72. The log cabin had a(n)
from the city throughout the year.
a.) abstract

b.) ersatz

c.) vindication

his right to

d.) winnow
about being dishonest

d.) evanescence

feel, so it was often enjoyed by vacationers

c.) rustic

d.) raucous

73. For
deeds during her mission overseas, Tyesha was awarded the
Congressional Medal of Honor.
a.) inept

b.) valorous

c.) erroneous

74. Sunlight shining through a window was an obvious
every one of the artist’s works.
a.) disjunction

b.) hindrance

NOT FOR SALE (Last updated: May 22, 2020)

c.) repugnance

d.) malodorous
in the nearly

d.) motif

75. Several weeks of extremely hot, dry weather
the land, so instead of
rowing across a river, we walked across a cracked, parched riverbed.
a.) oscillated

b.) desiccated

c.) subverted

d.) coalesced

76. As the pressures of her business became overwhelming, Charlotte chose to
her role as PTA president.
a.) expedite

b.) transgress

77. The heat was absolutely
uncomfortable.
a.) oppressive

c.) propagate

d.) relinquish

, making everyone irritable, sweaty, and

b.) salient

c.) replete

d.) prosaic

78. When the house on the corner burned down, the entire neighborhood
together to help to the victims re-establish their lives.
a.) rallied

b.) recited

c.) skulked

d.) disintegrated

79. Frank feels such
towards his ex-business partner that he cannot
stand to be in the same room with him.
a.) iniquity

b.) collusion

80. Oliver was unable to
forging the documents.
a.) reprove

c.) animosity

d.) pallor

himself from the difficulties he had caused by

b.) pique

c.) oust

d.) extricate

81. When Melinda arrived in the impoverished city, she was immediately
by bands of children begging for food.
a.) bedraggled

b.) accosted

c.) infiltrated

d.) rebuked

82. Given his
nature, it was appropriate that he decided to be a trial
lawyer after law school.
a.) lackluster

b.) engrossed

NOT FOR SALE (Last updated: May 22, 2020)

c. penitent

d. litigious

83. Buying homeowner’s insurance is a wise decision because it provides
if your house should be damaged in a fire.
a.) chastisement

b.) indemnity

c.) clarification

d.) resolution

84. Tabitha found an overpriced dining table at the antique shop and tried to
with the shopkeeper, but he refused to lower the price.
a.) haggle

b.) stipulate

c.) annunciate

d.) ruminate

85. With Justine’s
nature and passion for art, she would make an excellent
tour guide for the museum.
a.) volatile

b.) congenial

NOT FOR SALE (Last updated: May 22, 2020)

c.) servile

d.) fledgling

READING
COMPREHENSION

NOT FOR SALE (Last updated: May 22, 2020)

READING COMPREHENSION. Read the given passage and answer the following
questions.

The victory of the small Greek democracy of Athens over the mighty Persian
Empire in 490 B.C. is one of the most famous events in history. Darius, king of
the Persian Empire, was furious because Athens had interceded for the other
Greek city-states in revolt against Persian domination. In anger the king sent
an enormous army to defeat Athens. He thought it would take drastic steps to
pacify the rebellious part of the empire.
Persia was ruled by one man. In Athens, however, all citizens helped to rule.
Ennobled by this participation, Athenians were prepared to die for their citystate. Perhaps this was the secret of the remarkable victory at Marathon, which
freed them from Persian rule. On their way to Marathon, the Persians tried to
fool some Greek city-states by claiming to have come in peace. The frightened
citizens of Delos refused to believe this. Not wanting to abet the conquest of
Greece, they fled from their city and did not return until the Persians had left.
They were wise, for the Persians next conquered the city of Eritrea and
captured its people.
Tiny Athens stood alone against Persia. The Athenian people went to their
sanctuaries. There they prayed for deliverance. They asked their gods to
expedite their victory. The Athenians refurbished their weapons and moved to
the plain of Marathon, where their little band would meet the Persians. At the
last moment, soldiers from Plataea reinforced the Athenian troops.
The Athenian army attacked, and Greek citizens fought bravely. The power of
the mighty Persians was offset by the love that the Athenians had for their city.
Athenians defeated the Persians in both archery and hand combat. Greek
soldiers seized Persian ships and burned them, and the Persians fled in terror.
Herodotus, a famous historian, reports that 6,400 Persians died, compared to
only 192 Athenians.

86. Athens had

the other Greek city-states against the Persians.

a.) refused help to
b.) intervened on behalf of
87. Darius took drastic steps to
a.) weaken

b.) destroy

NOT FOR SALE (Last updated: May 22, 2020)

c.) wanted to fight
d.) given orders for all to fight
the rebellious Athenian.
c.) calm

d.) irritate

88. Their participation
a.) gave comfort

to the Athenians.
b.) gave honor

89. The people of Delos did not want to
a.) end

b.) encourage

90. The Athenians were
a.) welcomed

c.) gave strength

d.) gave fear

the conquest of Greece.
c.) think about

d.) daydream about

by some soldiers who arrived from Plataea.
b.) strengthened

c.) held

d.) captured

Desertification, the creation of desert-like conditions where none had existed
before, is the result of the vagaries of weather and climate or the
mismanagement of the land or, in most cases, some combination of both. Such
ecological deterioration in the Sahel has been linked in several ways to the
increased size of livestock herds. During the fifteen years preceding 1968, a
period of extremely favorable rainfall, the pastoralists moved into the marginal
regions in the north with relatively large herds. However, with the onset of a
series of dry years beginning at the end of the rainy season in 1967, the
pastoral populations found themselves overtaxing very marginal rangelands,
with the result that the nomads viewed themselves as victims of a natural
disaster. The mistaken idea that drought is an unexpected event has often
been used to excuse the fact that long-range planning has failed to take rainfall
variability into account. People blame the climate for agricultural failures in
semiarid regions and make it a scapegoat for faulty population and agricultural
policies.
Deterioration and ultimately desertification in the Sahel and in other
ecosystems can be combated only if an ecologically realistic carrying capacity
for the rangelands is determined. Although there appears to be widespread
agreement that such a determination would be significant, there has been little
agreement on how to make operational the concept of carrying capacity,
defined as the amount of grazing stock that the pasture can support without
deterioration of either the pasture or the stock. Should the carrying capacity be
geared to the best, the average, or the poorest years? Which combination of
statistical measures would be most meaningful for the planning of long-term
development of rangelands? On which variables should such an assessment
be based, vegetation, rainfall, soil, ground and surface water, or managerial
capabilities? Such inconclusiveness within the scientific community, while
understandable, creates confusion for the land managers, who often decide to
take no action or who decide that all scientific suggestions are of equal weight
NOT FOR SALE (Last updated: May 22, 2020)

and, therefore, indiscriminately choose any one of those suggested. Given the
downward spiral of land deterioration, it becomes essential that an ecologically
acceptable carrying capacity be established and enforced.
It will also be crucial that land managers know what statistical and quasistatistical measures actually mean: no single number can adequately describe
the climate regime of an arid or semiarid region. Land managers must
supplement such terms as the “mean” with more informative statistical
measures to characterize adequately the variability of the climate. The
understanding of this high degree of variability will serve to remove one of the
major obstacles to resolving the perennial problems of the Sahel and of other
arid or semiarid regions.

91. The author is primarily concerned with

.

a.) criticizing a social attitude
b.) suggesting an approach to solving a problem
c.) explaining the mechanics of a process
d.) defending the theories of ecological scientists
92. According to the passage, which of the following contributed to the desertification
of the Sahel?
I. The size of the livestock herds grazing on the land
II. The quality of the land in the Sahel
III. The amount of rainfall after 1967
a.) I only

b.) II only

c.) I and III only

d.) I, II, and III

93. It can be inferred from the passage that the nomadic tribes who moved into the
marginal regions of the Sahel did NOT
.
a.) enlarge the size of their livestock herds
b.) conserve water after the drought began
c.) live in the Sahel after 1968
d.) expect a drastic change in weather conditions
94. It can be inferred from the passage that the concept of the carrying capacity of
land is
.
a.) still hypothetical rather than practical
b.) basically political rather than ecological
NOT FOR SALE (Last updated: May 22, 2020)

c.) independent of climatic conditions
d.) relatively unknown among ecologists
95. Which of the following best states the author’s view concerning the relationship
between the ecological scientist and the land manager?
a.) The scientist has not provided the manager with clear guidelines that can be
used in regulating the productivity of land.
b.) The scientist has provided theories that are too detailed for the manager to
use successfully.
c.) The scientist and the manager, in attempting to regulate the use of semiarid
land, have ignored the traditional behavior patterns of pastoral communities.
d.) The manager has misunderstood and hence misapplied the suggestions of
the scientist.
96. With which of the following statements concerning desertification would the
author be most likely to agree?
a.) It is the result of factors beyond the control of science.
b.) It is a problem largely affecting arid regions.
c.) It could be prevented if land managers understood statistics.
d.) It is not always the result of drastic climate changes alone.
97. According to the passage, a statistical description of the climate regime of an arid
or semiarid region would probably be
.
a.) misleading

b.) impossible

c.) complex

d.) meaningless

98. The tone of the passage can best be described as
a.) flippant

b.) objective

c.) aggressive

d.) apologetic

Coral reefs are one of the most fragile, biologically complex, and diverse
marine ecosystems on Earth. This ecosystem is one of the fascinating
paradoxes of the biosphere: how do clear, and thus nutrient-poor, waters
support such prolific and productive communities? Part of the answer lies
within the tissues of the corals themselves. Symbiotic cells of algae known as
zooxanthellae carry out photosynthesis using the metabolic wastes of the coral
thereby producing food for themselves, for their corals, hosts, and even for
other members of the reef community. This symbiotic process allows
organisms in the reef community to use sparse nutrient resources efficiently.
NOT FOR SALE (Last updated: May 22, 2020)

Unfortunately for coral reefs, however, a variety of human activities are causing
worldwide degradation of shallow marine habitats by adding nutrients to the
water. Agriculture, slash-and-burn land clearing, sewage disposal and
manufacturing that creates waste by-products all increase nutrient loads in
these waters. Typical symptoms of reef decline are destabilized herbivore
populations and an increasing abundance of algae and filter-feeding animals.
Declines in reef communities are consistent with observations that nutrient
input is increasing in direct proportion to growing human populations, thereby
threatening reef communities sensitive to subtle changes in nutrient input to
their waters.

99. The passage is primarily concerned with
a.) describing the effects of human activities on algae in coral reefs
b.) explaining how human activities are posing a threat to coral reef
communities
c.) discussing the process by which coral reefs deteriorate in nutrient-poor
waters
d.) explaining how coral reefs produce food for themselves
100.
The passage suggests which of the following about coral reef
communities?
a.) Coral reef communities may actually be more likely to thrive in waters that
are relatively low in nutrients.
b.) The nutrients on which coral reef communities thrive are only found in
shallow waters.
c.) Human population growth has led to changing ocean temperatures, which
threatens coral reef communities.
d.) The growth of coral reef communities tends to destabilize underwater
herbivore populations.
101.

The author refers to “filter-feeding animals” in order to

a.) provide an example of a characteristic sign of reef deterioration
b.) explain how reef communities acquire sustenance for survival
c.) identify a factor that helps herbivore populations thrive
d.) indicate a cause of decreasing nutrient input in waters that reefs inhabit
102.

According to the passage, which of the following is a factor that is
threatening the survival of coral reef communities?

NOT FOR SALE (Last updated: May 22, 2020)

.

a.) The waters they inhabit contain few nutrient resources
b.) A decline in nutrient input is disrupting their symbiotic relationship with
zooxanthellae.
c.) The degraded waters of their marine habitats have reduced their ability to
carry out photosynthesis.
d.) Waste by-products result in an increase in nutrient input to reef communities.
103.

It can be inferred from the passage that the author describes coral reef
communities as paradoxical most likely for which of the following reasons?

a.) They are thriving even though human activities have depleted the nutrients in
their environment.
b.) They are able to survive in spite of an overabundance of algae inhabiting
their waters.
c.) They are able to survive in an environment with limited food resources.
d.) Their metabolic wastes contribute to the degradation of the waters that they
inhabit.

The unpleasant feeling passed and she glanced up at him. He was walking
unmarked in moonlight, innocent of her reaction to him. She felt then - this
thought had come to her before - that there might be more to him than she had
imagined. She felt ashamed she never thanked him for the help he had given
her father.

104.

She glanced at him when

.

a.) He walked along and unnoticed in moonlight
b.) She was sure that she was not being noticed
c.) Her reactions did not have any effect on him
d.) The unpleasant feeling passed
105.

Her unpleasant feeling passed when

.

a.) He did not take any notice of her
b.) The moonlight was beautiful
c.) She realized her sense of shame
d.) She looked carefully at him
106.

She was ashamed because

NOT FOR SALE (Last updated: May 22, 2020)

.

a.) She was spying on him
b.) There was more to him than she had imagined
c.) A recurring thought came back to her
d.) She had never thanked him for this help to her father

The man sat up in the snow for a moment and struggled for calmness. Then
he pulled on his gloves by means of these teeth, and got upon his feet. He
glanced down at first in order to assure himself that he was really standing up,
for the absence of sensation in his feet left him unrelated to the earth. His erect
position in itself started to drive the webs of suspicion from the dog's mind; and
when he spoke peremptorily, with the sound of whip-lashes in his voice, the
dog rendered its customary allegiance and came to him. As it came within
reaching distance, the man lost his control. His arms flashed out to the dog and
he experienced genuine surprise when he discovered that his hands could not
clutch, that there was neither bend nor feeling in the fingers. He had forgotten
for the moment that they were frozen and that they were freezing more and
more. All this happened quickly and before the animal could get away, he
encircled its body with his arms. He sat down in the snow and in this fashion
held the dog, while it snarled and whined and struggled.

107.

From the passage, which group of words expresses the effect of snow upon
the man's feet

a.) With the sound of whip-lashed in his voice
b.) His arms, flashed out to the dog
c.) The absence of sensation in his feet left him unrelated to the earth
d.) The man sat up in the snow for a moment and struggled for calmness
108.

The statement that the man experienced genuine surprise when he
discovered that his hands could not clutch means that
.

a.) The man did not see anything to clutch
b.) The man had nothing to clutch
c.) The man was afraid of the dog
d.) There was neither bend nor feeling in the fingers
109.

Which word or group of words shows the extract condition of being 'frozen'?

a.) Whip-lashes in his voice
NOT FOR SALE (Last updated: May 22, 2020)

b.) He pulled on his gloves
c.) His hands could not clutch
d.) Lost his control

Socrates used to move about the roads or stand in the market place all day
long. He talked to anyone who cared to greet him. He argued and asked many
questions. Sometimes he left his listeners in a very confused state of mind
because he seemed to be questioning, doubting or trying to change things
about which people had never really thought, but had taken for granted.
Socrates believed that everyone should learn to think for himself. He believed
that everyone should have the power to see what was right, just, true and
beautiful. He wanted Athens to be a perfect state and he believed that this
could happen if every citizen educated his own mind to see what was right and
noble.

110.

People were confused by Socrates' questions because

.

a.) he asked them in the market place
b.) the questions were addressed to anyone and everyone
c.) he was argumentative and asked too many questions
d.) the questions were on topics that people had never really thought about
111.

Socrates believed that everyone should learn

a.) to read and write
b.) to be wise
112.

.

c.) to think for himself
d.) whatever was good and noble

Socrates thought that Athens would become a perfect state if

.

a.) its people attained perfection
b.) everyone became educated in the arts
c.) its people did great things
d.) its people developed a sense of right and just

Young seekers after peace know that only equal trust shown to all the peoples
of the earth and not just to a few of them, can lead to the healing of the wounds
that tear them apart and so it is essential never to humiliate the members of a
nation whose leaders have committed inhuman acts. Essential also is
boundless concern for so many men and women who today, as exiles or
NOT FOR SALE (Last updated: May 22, 2020)

immigrants, live on foreign soil. If every home was open to somebody of foreign
origin, the racial problem would be partially solved.

113.

For the reconciliation and unity, it is essential

.

a.) to have no discrimination in the trust shown to peoples of the earth
b.) to have young seekers after peace
c.) to have confidence in at least a few of the peoples
d.) to punish the leaders who committed inhuman sins
114.

To make the members of a nation responsible for the inhuman acts of their
leaders is
.

a.) unimportant
115.

b.) understandable

c.) unjust

Boundless concern should be shown to

d.) undesirable
.

a.) one's own countrymen alone
b.) the people belonging to our friendly nations only
c.) the foreigners who just visit our country
d.) all the exiles living away from their native lands
116.

The theme of the passage is

.

a.) Rigid nationalism alone can help peaceful co-existence
b.) Trusting all the peoples of the earth may lead to serious problems
c.) Being cautious of others is a must to live in peace
d.) Concern for everyone irrespective of the race or country

The Bermuda Triangle occupies a disturbing and almost unbelievable place in
the world's catalog of unexplained mysteries. More than a hundred planes and
ships have vanished in this area into the air since 1945, and more than a
thousand lives have been lost, without a single body or even a piece wreckage
from the vanishing planes or ships having been found. Many of the planes
concerned have vanished while in normal radio contact with their base until the
very moment of their disappearance, while others have radioed the most
extraordinary messages, implying that they could not get their instruments to
function, that their compasses were spinning, that the sky had turned yellow
NOT FOR SALE (Last updated: May 22, 2020)

and hazy on a clear day, and the ocean, which was calm nearby, didn't look
right without further clarification of what was wrong.

117.

One can infer from the reading that

.

a.) the wreckages of some ships and planes have been found in the Bermuda
Triangle
b.) the number of incidents involving lost ships is no larger than that of any other
heavily traveled region of the world
c.) the ships. and the planes couldn't contact with their base due to the lack of
equipment
d.) the first mention of disappearances in the area was made in 1945
118.

It is pointed out in the passage that

.

a.) thousands of people lost their lives in the Bermuda Triangle in 1945
b.) all of the disappearances happened during the day time
c.) the Bermuda Triangle mystery was solved in 1945
d.) the ocean floor near Bermuda, highly unexplored, is host to many strange
phenomena
119.

The reading mainly deals with

.

a.) why so many ships and planes disappear in the Bermuda Triangle
b.) the mysterious disappearances of ships and planes in the Bermuda Triangle
c.) the location of the Bermuda Triangle
d.) the frequency of the disappearances in the Bermuda Triangle

Species interdependence in nature confers many benefits on the species
involved, but it can also become a point of weakness when one species
involved in the relationship is affected by a catastrophe. Thus, flowering plant
species dependent on insect pollination, as opposed to self-pollination or wind
pollination, could be endangered when the population of insect-pollinators is
depleted by the use of pesticides.
In the forests of New Brunswick, for example, various pesticides have been
sprayed in the past 25 years in efforts to control the spruce budworm, an
economically significant pest. Scientists have now investigated the effects of
the spraying of Matacil, one of the anti-budworm agents that is least toxic to
insect-pollinators. They studied Matacil’s effects on insect mortality in a wide
variety of wild insect species and on plant fecundity, expressed as the
NOT FOR SALE (Last updated: May 22, 2020)

percentage of the total flowers on an individual plant that actually developed
fruit and bore seeds. They found that the most pronounced mortality after the
spraying of Matacil occurred among the smaller bees and one family of flies,
insects that were all important pollinators of numerous species of plants
growing beneath the tree canopy of forests.
The fecundity of plants in one common indigenous species, the red-osier
dogwood, was significantly reduced in the sprayed areas as compared to that
of plants in control plots where Matacil was not sprayed. This species is highly
dependent on the insect-pollinators most vulnerable to Matacil. The creeping
dogwood, a species similar to the red-osier dogwood, but which is pollinated
by large bees, such as bumblebees, showed no significant decline in fecundity.
Since large bees are not affected by the spraying of Matacil, these results add
weight to the argument that spraying where the pollinators are sensitive to the
pesticide used decreases plant fecundity.
The question of whether the decrease in plant fecundity caused by the spraying
of pesticides actually causes a decline in the overall population of flowering
plant species still remains unanswered. Plant species dependent solely on
seeds for survival or dispersal are obviously more vulnerable to any decrease
in plant fecundity that occurs, whatever its cause. If, on the other hand,
vegetative growth and dispersal (by means of shoots or runners) are available
as alternative reproductive strategies for a species, then decreases in plant
fecundity may be of little consequence. The fecundity effects described here
are likely to have the most profound impact on plant species with all four of the
following characteristics: a short life span, a narrow geographic range, an
incapacity for vegetative propagation, and a dependence on a small number of
insect-pollinator species. Perhaps we should give special attention to the
conservation of such plant species since they lack key factors in their defenses
against the environmental disruption caused by pesticide use.

120.

Which of the following best summarizes the main point of the passage?

a.) Species interdependence is a point of weakness for some plants, but is
generally beneficial to insects involved in pollination
b.) Efforts to control the spruce budworm have had deleterious effects on the
red-osier dogwood
c.) The use of pesticides may be endangering certain plant species dependent
on insects for pollination
d.) Plant species lacking key factors in their defenses against human
environmental disruption will probably become extinct
NOT FOR SALE (Last updated: May 22, 2020)

121.

According to the author, a flowering plant species whose fecundity has
declined due to pesticide spraying may not experience an overall population
decline if the plant species can do which of the following?

a.) Reproduce itself by means of shoots and runners
b.) Survive to the end of the growing season
c.) Survive in harsh climates
d.) Respond to the fecundity decline by producing more flowers
122.

The passage suggests that the lack of an observed decline in the fecundity
of the creeping dogwood strengthens the researcher’s conclusions regarding
pesticide use because the
.

a.) creeping dogwood is a species that does not resemble other forest plants
b.) creeping dogwood is a species pollinated by a broader range of insect
species than are most dogwood species
c.) creeping dogwood grows primarily in regions that were not sprayed with
pesticide, and so served as a control for the experiment
d.) creeping dogwood is similar to the red-osier dogwood, but its insect
pollinators are known to be insensitive to the pesticide used in the study
123.

The passage suggests that which of the following is true of the forest regions
in New Brunswick sprayed with most anti-budworm pesticides other than
Matacil?

a.) The fecundity of some flowering plants in those regions may have decreased
to an even greater degree than in the regions where Matacil is used
b.) Insect mortality in those regions occurs mostly among the larger species of
insects, such as bumblebees
c.) The number of seeds produced by common plant species in those regions is
probably comparable to the number produced where Matacil is sprayed
d.) Many more plant species have become extinct in those regions than in the
regions where Matacil is used.
124.

It can be inferred that which of the following is true of plant fecundity as it is
defined in the passage?

a.) A plant’s fecundity decreases as the percentage of unpollinated flowers on
the plant increases
b.) A plant’s fecundity decreases as the number of flowers produced by the
plant decreases
NOT FOR SALE (Last updated: May 22, 2020)

c.) A plant’s fecundity increases as the number of flowers produced by the plant
increases
d.) A plant’s fecundity is usually low if the plant relies on a small number of
insect species for pollination.
125.

It can be inferred from the passage that which of the following plant species
would be LEAST likely to experience a decrease in fecundity as a result of
the spraying of a pesticide not directly toxic to plants?

a.) A flowering tree pollinated by only a few insect species
b.) A kind of insect-pollinated vine producing few flowers
c.) A wind-pollinated flowering tree that is short-lived
d.) A flowering shrub pollinated by a large number of insect species
126.

Which of the following assumptions most probably underlies the author’s
tentative recommendation?

a.) Human activities that result in environmental disruption should be
abandoned
b.) The use of pesticides is likely to continue into the future
c.) It is economically beneficial to preserve endangered plant species
d.) Conservation efforts aimed at preserving a few well-chosen species are
more cost-effective than are broader-based efforts to improve the
environment

By the time a child is six or seven she has all the essential avoidances well
enough by heart to be trusted with the care of a younger child. And she also
develops a number of simple techniques. She learns to weave firm square balls
from palm leaves, to make pinwheels of palm leaves or frangipani blossoms,
to climb a coconut tree by walking up the trunk on flexible little feet, to break
open a coconut with one firm well-directed blow of a knife as long as she is tall,
to play a number of group games and sing the songs which go with them, to
tidy the house by picking up the litter on the stony floor, to bring water from the
sea, to spread out the copra to dry and to help gather it in when rain threatens,
to go to a neighboring house and bring back a lighted faggot for the chief's pipe
or the cook-house fire.
But in the case of the little girls all these tasks are merely supplementary to the
main business of baby-tending. Very small boys also have some care of the
younger children, but at eight or nine years of age they are usually relieved of
it. Whatever rough edges have not been smoothed off by this responsibility for
younger children are worn off by their contact with older boys.
NOT FOR SALE (Last updated: May 22, 2020)

For little boys are admitted to interesting and important activities only so long
as their behavior is circumspect and helpful. Where small girls are brusquely
pushed aside, small boys will be patiently tolerated and they become adept at
making themselves useful. The four or five little boys who all wish to assist at
the important, business of helping a grown youth lasso reef eels, organize
themselves into a highly efficient working team; one boy holds the bait, another
holds an extra lasso, others poke eagerly about in holes in the reef looking for
prey, while still another tucks the captured eels into his lavalava.
The small girls, burdened with heavy babies or the care of little staggerers who
are too small to adventure on the reef, discouraged by the hostility of the small
boys and the scorn of the older ones, have little opportunity for learning the
more adventurous forms of work and play. So while the little boys first undergo
the chastening effects of baby-tending and then have many opportunities to
learn effective cooperation under the supervision of older boys, the girls'
education is less comprehensive. They have a high standard of individual
responsibility, but the community provides them with no lessons in cooperation
with one another. This is particularly apparent in the activities of young people:
the boys organize quickly; the girls waste hours in bickering, innocent of any
technique for quick and efficient cooperation.

127.

The primary purpose of the passage with reference to the society under
discussion is to
.

a.) explain some differences in the upbringing of girls and boys
b.) criticize the deficiencies in the education of girls
c.) give a comprehensive account of a day in the life of an average young girl
d.) delineate the role of young girls
128.

The word 'brusquely' most nearly means

a.) quickly
129.

b.) gently

d.) abruptly

The list of techniques in paragraph one could best be described as

a.) household duties
b.) rudimentary physical skills
130.

c.) nonchalantly

.

c.) important responsibilities
d.) useful social skills

It can be inferred that the 'high standard of individual responsibility' is

NOT FOR SALE (Last updated: May 22, 2020)

a.) developed mainly through child-care duties
b.) only present in girls
c.) taught to the girl before she is entrusted with babies
d.) actually counterproductive
131.

The expression 'innocent of' is best taken to mean

a.) not guilty of
b.) unskilled in
132.

.

c.) unsuited for
d.) uninvolved in

It can be inferred that in the community under discussion all of the following
are important except
.

a.) domestic handicrafts
b.) well-defined social structure

c.) fishing skills
d.) formal education

133.

Which of the following if true would weaken the author's contention about
'lessons in cooperation'?
I. Group games played by younger girls involve cooperation
II. Girls can learn from watching boys cooperating
III. Individual girls cooperate with their mothers in looking after babies

a.) I only
134.

b.) II only

c.) III only

d.) I and II only

Which of the following is the best description of the author's technique in
handling her material?

a.) Both description and interpretation of observations
b.) Presentation of facts without comment
c.) Description of evidence to support a theory
d.) Generalization from a particular viewpoint

Although there is a great deal of variation within each gender, on the average
men and women discuss a surprisingly different range of topics. According to
some studies, women and men ranging in age from seventeen to eighty
described the range of topics each discussed with friends of the same sex.
Certain topics were common to both men and women: work, movies, and
television proved to be frequent topics for both groups. The differences
between men and women were more striking than the similarities. Female
friends spent much more time discussing personal and domestic subjects,
relationship problems, family, health and reproductive matters, weight, food
NOT FOR SALE (Last updated: May 22, 2020)

and clothing. Men, on the other hand, were more likely to discuss music,
current events, sports and business. Women were more likely to gossip about
close friends and family. By contrast, men spent more time gossiping about
sports figures and media personalities. These differences can lead to
frustration when men and women try to converse with one another.

135.

It is stated in the passage that women

.

a.) are unwilling to discuss personal subjects
b.) are more interested in discussing relationship problems than are men
c.) never talk about other men and women
d.) don't like gossiping about anything
136.

According to the passage, men

.

a.) need to learn to communicate better
b.) like talking about movies and television as much as women do
c.) are not likely to gossip on anything
d.) have no common topics with women
137.

The passage mainly discusses

.

a.) what women's conversational topics are
b.) why men don't like conversing with women
c.) the topics men like discussing
d.) the conversational topics of men and women

Most of you probably did not see Mohan at close quarters. He had amazing
qualities. One of these qualities was that he managed to draw out the good in
another person. The other person may have had plenty of evil in him. But he
somehow spotted the good and laid emphasis on the good. The result was that
the poor man had to try to be good. He could not help it. He would feel ashamed
when he did something wrong.

138.

The author assumes that most of us

a.) have not seen Mohan
b.) have not heard of Mohan
c.) are not well-acquainted with Mohan's powers
NOT FOR SALE (Last updated: May 22, 2020)

.

d.) have not observed Mohan's house closely
139.

One of Mohan's greatest qualities was that

.

a.) he could completely destroy the evil in another man
b.) he could discover the good in another man
c.) he always maintained a good life
d.) he always kept away from bad men
140.

The other man is called poor because

.

a.) he usually came from a poor family
b.) he was always very evil
c.) he must try to become good and give up his evil ways
d.) he did not know what to do and was helpless
141.

The other man tried to be good because

.

a.) Mohan forced him to do so
b.) he wanted to imitate Mohan
c.) he was ashamed of doing a wrong thing
d.) he did not want to remain poor
People seldom feel neutral about poetry. Those who love it sometimes give
the impression that it is an adequate substitute for food, shelter, and love. But
it isn't. Those who dislike poetry on principle sometimes claim, on the other
hand, that poetry is only words and good for nothing. That's not true either.
When words represent and recreate genuine human feelings, as they often do
in poetry, they can be very important. Poems provide, in fact, a language for
feeling, and one of poetry's most insistent merits involves its attempt to
express the inexpressible. One of the joys of experiencing poetry occurs when
we read a poem and want to say, "yes, that is just what it is like; I know exactly
what that line means but I have never been able to express it so well." Poetry
can be the voice of our feelings even when our minds are speechless with
grief or joy.
142.

One can understand from the passage that people

.

a.) seldom feel that poetry is an equivalent for life itself
b.) rarely take a biased opinion about poetry
c.) generally think that poetry expresses what might otherwise seem unutterable
d.) generally think of poetry as extremely important or totally useless
NOT FOR SALE (Last updated: May 22, 2020)

143.

One point made by the author in the passage is that poetry

.

a.) tends to make the reader disappointed
b.) is an adequate substitute for food, shelter, and love
c.) is only words and good for nothing
d.) often captures real human feelings
144.

The author points out in the reading that

.

a.) poetry is not closely concerned with feelings
b.) poems are primarily about how people think rather than how people feel
c.) poetry can't be the expression of one's deepest feelings
d.) few people think that poetry is neutral

Albert Einstein was born in 1879 in the German city of Ulm. He had been no
infant prodigy; indeed, he was so late in learning to speak that his parents
feared he was fool. In school, though his teachers saw no special talent in
him, the signs were already there. He taught himself calculus, for example,
and he told me that his teachers seemed a little afraid of him because he
asked questions they could not answer. At the age of 16, he asked himself
whether a light wave would seem stationary if one ran side by side of it. It
seems an innocent question, but this shows Einstein going to the heart of a
problem. From it there would arise, ten years later, his theory of relativity.

145.

Albert Einstein

.

a.) is the most genius scientist of all
b.) was born in the 18th century
c.) was spoiled by his teachers in school
d.) made his parents afraid due to his problem in speech in his childhood
146.

When he was in school, Einstein

.

a.) showed no signals about his genius
b.) was afraid of his teachers due to their innocent questions
c.) asked difficult questions to his teachers
d.) was understood as genius by public when he was a teenager
147.

It's obvious in the passage, Einstein's

NOT FOR SALE (Last updated: May 22, 2020)

.

a.) genius was a gift
b.) character was perfect to most of his teachers
c.) life encouraged most of the scientist in the world
d.) question is the origin of his theory of relativity

The Richter Magnitude Scale is a method of assigning a single number to
quantify the energy released during an earthquake. The magnitude is defined
as the logarithm of the ratio of wave's amplitude, measured through a
seismograph. Therefore, an earthquake that measures 5.0 of the Richter
scale has a shaking amplitude of 10 times that of an earthquake measuring
4.0. Since the middle of the 20th century, the Richter Scale has been mostly
superseded by the Moment Magnitude Scale, the Richter Scale is still used
in Russia and some other former Soviet Union states.

148.

Which one of the following best replaces "method" while maintaining the
meaning of the sentence?

a.) Measurement
149.

b.) Scale

c. Approach

d.) Process

Which one of the following best replaces "superseded" while maintaining the
meaning of the sentence?

a.) Supplanted

b.) Transferred

c.) Removed

d.) Usurped

In 1892, the Sierra Club was formed. In 1908, an area of coastal redwood
trees north of San Francisco was established as Muir Woods National
Monument. In the Sierra Nevada Mountains, a walking trail from Yosemite
Valley to Mount Whitney was dedicated in 1938. It is called the John Muir
Trail.
John Muir was born in 1838 in Scotland. His family name means "moor,"
which is a meadow full of flowers and animals. John loved nature from the
time he was small. He also liked to climb rocky cliffs and walls.
When John was 11 years old, his family moved to the United States and
settled in Wisconsin. John was good with tools and soon became an
inventor. He first invented a model of a sawmill. Later, he invented an alarm
clock that would cause the sleeping person to be tipped out of bed when the
timer sounded.
NOT FOR SALE (Last updated: May 22, 2020)

Muir left home at an early age. He took a 1,000-mile walk south to the Gulf
of Mexico in 1867and 1868. Then he sailed for San Francisco. The city was
too noisy and crowded for Muir, so he headed inland for the Sierra Nevadas.
When Muir discovered the Yosemite Valley in the Sierra Nevadas, it was as
if he had come home. He loved the mountains, the wildlife, and the trees. He
climbed the mountains and even climbed trees during thunderstorms in order
to get closer to the wind. He put forth the theory in the late 1860s that the
Yosemite Valley had been formed through the action of glaciers. People
ridiculed him. Not until 1930 was Muir's theory proven correct.
Muir began to write articles about the Yosemite Valley to tell readers about
its beauty. His writing also warned people that Yosemite was in danger from
timber mining and sheep ranching interests. In 1901, Theodore Roosevelt
became president of the United States. He was interested in conservation.
Muir took the president through Yosemite, and Roosevelt helped get
legislation passed to create Yosemite National Park in 1906.
Although Muir won many conservation battles, he lost a major one. He fought
to save the Hetch Hetchy Valley, which people wanted to dam in order to
provide water for San Francisco. In late 1913, a bill was signed to dam the
valley. Muir died in 1914. Some people say losing the fight to protect the
valley killed Muir.

150.

What happened first?

a.) The Muir family moved to the United States
b.) Muir Woods was created
c.) John Muir learned to climb rocky cliffs
d.) John Muir walked to the Gulf of Mexico
151.

When did Muir invent a unique form of alarm clock?

a.) While the family still lived in Scotland
b.) After he sailed to San Francisco
c.) After he traveled in Yosemite
d.) While the Muir family lived in Wisconsin
152.

What did John Muir do soon after he arrived in San Francisco?

NOT FOR SALE (Last updated: May 22, 2020)

a.) He ran outside during an earthquake
b.) He put forth a theory about how Yosemite was formed
c.) He headed inland for the Sierra Nevadas
d.) He began to write articles about the Sierra Nevadas
153.

When did John Muir meet Theodore Roosevelt?

a.) Between 1901 and 1906
b.) Between 1838 and 1868
154.

c.) Between 1906 and 1914
d.) Between 1868 and 1901

What happened last?

a.) John Muir died
b.) John Muir Trail was dedicated

c.) Muir's glacial theory was proven
d.) The Sierra Club was formed

Life processes are similar in all animals with backbones. So physiologists
can find out a lot about the human body by studying animals such as frogs,
rats and rabbits. Sometimes research involves the death of these animals.
But physiologists take great care not to hurt the animals. The animals are
usually put to sleep during the experiments so they do not feel pain. Many
people think animals should not be used for experiments. But it is only by
physiological research that medicine has been able to advance. Polio is a
disease that attacks the nerves. Millions of people have been protected from
polio by a fluid called a vaccine. Tissue from monkeys is used to make the
vaccine.

155.

According to the passage,

a.) animals with bones are of no great importance in experimental researches
b.) animals can die if not vaccined by experimental team
c.) although many people resist against animals being utilized in researches, it is
necessary
d.) by the help of experimental researches, millions of people have been
protected against rats and frogs
156.

Experimental researches

.

a.) are of paramount significance for the polio infected monkeys
b.) are the mere way that medicine can progress
c.) are carried out to remove infected tissues from the animals
NOT FOR SALE (Last updated: May 22, 2020)

d.) include only reptiles to discover the vaccines
157.

It's clearly stated in the passage that

a.) millions of people have been killed by polio disease so far
b.) physiologists can cure rats, rabbits and frogs as well as people
c.) experimental animals are first put to sleep and then used for research
d.) monkeys are usually infected with polio

In the 16th century, an age of great marine and terrestrial exploration,
Ferdinand Magellan led the first expedition to sail around the world. As a
young Portuguese noble, he served the king of Portugal, but he became
involved in the quagmire of political intrigue at court and lost the king's favor.
After he was dismissed from service by the king of Portugal, he offered to
serve the future Emperor Charles V of Spain.
A papal decree of 1493 had assigned all land in the New World west of 50
degrees W longitude to Spain and all the land east of that line to Portugal.
Magellan offered to prove that the East Indies fell under Spanish authority.
On September 20, 1519, Magellan set sail from Spain with five ships. More
than a year later, one of these ships was exploring the topography of South
America in search of a water route across the continent. This ship sank, but
the remaining four ships searched along the southern peninsula of South
America. Finally, they found the passage they sought near 50 degrees S
latitude. Magellan named this passage the Strait of All Saints, but today it is
known as the Strait of Magellan.
One ship deserted while in this passage and returned to Spain, so fewer
sailors were privileged to gaze at that first panorama of the Pacific Ocean.
Those who remained crossed the meridian now known as the International
Date Line in the early spring of 1521 after 98 days on the Pacific Ocean.
During those long days at sea, many of Magellan's men died of starvation
and disease.
Later, Magellan became involved in an insular conflict in the Philippines and
was killed in a tribal battle. Only one ship and 17 sailors under the command
of the Basque navigator Elcano survived to complete the westward journey
to Spain and thus prove once and for all that the world is round, with no
precipice at the edge.

158.

The 16th century was an age of great ______ exploration.

NOT FOR SALE (Last updated: May 22, 2020)

a.) cosmic
159.

b.) land

b.) discussion

b.) crosswise

b.) mountain range

d.) southeast

c.) physical features d.) islands
.

c.) body of land with water on three
sides
d.) border

b.) inland

The passage was found near 50 degrees S of ________.

a.) Greenwich
164.

c.) easterly

Four of the ships sought a passage along a southern

a.) coast

163.

d.) problem

One of Magellan's ships explored the _________ of South America for a
passage across the continent.

a.) coastline
162.

c.) negotiation

The Pope divided New World lands between Spain and Portugal according
to their location on one side or the other of an imaginary geographical line 50
degrees west of Greenwich that extends in a _________ direction.

a.) north and south
161.

d.) common man

Magellan lost the favor of the king of Portugal when he became involved in a
political ________.

a.) entanglement
160.

c.) mental

b.) The equator

c.) Spain

d.) Portugal

In the spring of 1521, the ships crossed the _______ now called the
International Date Line.

a.) imaginary circle passing through the poles
b.) imaginary line parallel to the equator
c.) area
d.) land mass

For nearly twenty years I taught boys, lovingly and was being loved in
return. When, after twenty-eight years of political work, I returned to
education, I might have confined myself to administrative side, but took part
in the actual instruction. This I did because I found happiness in it. Modern
NOT FOR SALE (Last updated: May 22, 2020)

conditions do not tolerate caste and its monopolies, and the high calling of
the educator is open to all.

165.

The author suggests that he left teaching after twenty years because

a.) he was dissatisfied with teaching
b.) he wanted to become administrator
c.) he wanted to take part in political activities
d.) he was busy with family and domestic affairs
166.

Which of the following types of educational activities did the author take up?

a.) Educational administration
b.) Teaching
167.

c.) Advising educational institutions
d.) All the above

Which one of the following phrases best helps to bring out the precise
meaning of the term 'high calling of the educator'?

a.) The noble profession of teaching
b.) The serious advice to the teacher
c.) The difficult work of educational administration
d.) The high-sounding phrases used to describe a teacher
He was that rare figure: a natural-born leader, tailored for greatness. When
he was but a child his mother had whispered to him, "My son, you are a
child of the dawn. You will be a man of glory, a great leader of your people."
Sukarno never forgot those words. Liberating his land from 350 years of
colonial rule, he molded many disparate peoples into a nation that became
the fifth most populous in the world, one of the richest of all in natural
resources. He gave his people a language of their own, raised their literacy
rate from six to above 55 percent, gave them an intense from pride in being
Indonesians. He had monumental talents: an oratorical gift that could sway
and charm, an abundance of that indefinable mystique called "charisma."
Responding, his people gave him loyalty beyond love, reverence
approaching god-worship.

168.

Sukarno is a man who

.

a.) is endowed with leadership
b.) used to design clothes when he was a child
NOT FOR SALE (Last updated: May 22, 2020)

c.) had a natural-born great mother
d.) caused people to be rebellious against the government
169.

It's stated in the passage that Sukarno

.

a.) is the only child of his parents
b.) couldn't liberate his land from colonial rule
c.) built a nation out of separate communities
d.) opposed giving his public their own language
170.

After having freed his land from colonial rule, Sukarno

.

a.) suddenly built a monument dedicated to himself
b.) caused his people to be ashamed of themselves
c.) increased the population of Indonesia
d.) increased the level of literacy of his people

Although genetic mutations in bacteria and viruses can lead to epidemics,
some epidemics are caused by bacteria and viruses that have undergone
no significant genetic change. In analyzing the latter, scientists have
discovered the importance of social and ecological factors to epidemics.
Poliomyelitis, for example, emerged as an epidemic in the United States in
the twentieth century; by then, modern sanitation was able to delay
exposure to polio until adolescence or adulthood, at which time polio
infection produced paralysis.
Previously, infection had occurred during infancy, when it typically provided
lifelong immunity without paralysis. Thus, the hygiene that helped prevent
typhoid epidemics indirectly fostered a paralytic polio epidemic. Another
example is Lyme disease, which is caused by bacteria that are transmitted
by deer ticks. It occurred only sporadically during the late nineteenth
century but has recently become prevalent in parts of the United States,
largely due to an increase in the deer population that occurred
simultaneously with the growth of the suburbs and increased outdoor
recreational activities in the deer’s habitat. Similarly, an outbreak of dengue
hemorrhagic fever became an epidemic in Asia in the 1950’s because of
ecological changes that caused Aedes aegypti, the mosquito that transmits
the dengue virus, to proliferate. The stage is now set in the United States
for a dengue epidemic because of the inadvertent introduction and wide
dissemination of another mosquito, Aedes albopictus.

NOT FOR SALE (Last updated: May 22, 2020)

171.

The passage suggests that a lack of modern sanitation would make which of
the following most likely to occur?

a.) An outbreak of Lyme disease
b.) An outbreak of dengue hemorrhagic fever
c.) An epidemic of typhoid
d.) An epidemic of paralytic polio among infants
172.

According to the passage, the outbreak of dengue hemorrhagic fever in the
1950’s occurred for which of the following reasons?

a.) The mosquito Aedes aegypti was newly introduced into Asia
b.) The mosquito Aedes aegypti became more numerous
c.) The mosquito Aedes albopictus became infected with the dengue virus
d.) Individuals who would normally acquire immunity to the dengue virus as
infants were not infected until later in life
173.

It can be inferred from the passage that Lyme disease has become prevalent
in parts of the United States because of which of the following?

a.) The inadvertent introduction of Lyme disease bacteria to the United States
b.) The inability of modern sanitation methods to eradicate Lyme disease
bacteria
c.) A genetic mutation in Lyme disease bacteria that makes them more virulent
d.) An increase in the number of humans who encounter deer ticks
174.

Which of the following can most reasonably be concluded about the
mosquito Aedes albopictus on the basis of information given in the passage?

a.) It is native to the United States
b.) It can proliferate only in Asia
c.) It transmits the dengue virus
d.) It caused an epidemic of dengue hemorrhagic fever in the 1950’s.
175.

Which of the following best describes the organization of the passage?

a.) A paradox is stated, discussed and left unresolved
b.) Two opposing explanations are presented, argued, and reconciled
c.) A theory is proposed and is then followed by descriptions of three
experiments that support the theory
d.) A generalization is stated and is then followed by three instances that support
the generalization
NOT FOR SALE (Last updated: May 22, 2020)

SCIENCE

NOT FOR SALE (Last updated: May 22, 2020)

176.

“For every action, there is an equal and opposite reaction.” If a baseball
player hits a ball with a bat – and the “action” is said to be the impact of the
bat against the ball – what is its “opposite reaction?”

a.) The grip of the player’s hand on the bat
b.) The air resistance on the ball
c.) The force of the ball against the bat
d.) Muscular effort in the player’s arm
177.

Gravitational potential energy is energy an object possesses because of its
position in a gravitational field. Which of the following has the most
gravitational potential energy?

a.) A truck at the top of the hill
b.) A truck speeding down the hill
c.) A pendulum at the center of trajectory
d.) A man on his mountain bike speeding down the hill
178.

Atoms of an element differ from those of all elements in

.

a.) atomic number and electronic configuration
b.) number of neutrons and number of valence electrons
c.) atomic number and number of valence electrons
d.) number of neutrons and electronic configuration
179.

In the chemical equation 𝑁2 + 3𝐻3 → 2𝑁𝐻3 , how many moles of 𝐻3 are
needed to react with 2.5 mole 𝑁2 ?

a.) 2.5
180.

b.) 5.0

d.) 10.0

Balance the following equation: 𝐶6 𝐻12 𝑂4 + 𝑂2 → 𝐶𝑂2 + 𝐻2 𝑂

a.) 𝐶6 𝐻12 𝑂4 + 15𝑂2 → 6𝐶𝑂2 + 7𝐻2 𝑂
b.) 𝐶6 𝐻12 𝑂4 + 7𝑂2 → 6𝐶𝑂2 + 6𝐻2 𝑂
181.

c.) 7.5

c.) 4𝐶6 𝐻12 𝑂4 + 30𝑂2 → 24𝐶𝑂2 + 26𝐻2 𝑂
d.) 𝐶6 𝐻12 𝑂4 + 15𝑂2 → 6𝐶𝑂2 + 7𝐻2 𝑂

A new insecticide was very effective in killing flies and mosquitoes. After
several months, fewer insects were observed to die from the spray. The
reason why fewer insects are killed is that
.

a.) Insects which survive the spraying developed a liking for the insecticide
b.) Insects which survive the spraying developed immunity to the insecticide
NOT FOR SALE (Last updated: May 22, 2020)

c.) The insecticide’s effectiveness was reduced with aging
d.) There is permanent mutation giving insects resistance to the insecticide
182.

Which of the following is true about sub atomic particles, mass number and
atomic number?

a.) mass number is equal to the number of neutrons
b.) proton plus electron is equal to the mass number
c.) atomic number is equal to the number of protons
d.) neutron number can be calculated given only the mass number
183.

Why is a virus not a living organism?

a.) It can never reproduce
b.) It is simpler than bacteria
184.

When mechanical energy is conserved, potential energy is maximum when
kinetic energy is
a.) maximum

185.

c.) It is not a complete cell
d.) All of the above

b.) minimum

c.) equal

d.) none of the above

In an atomic explosion, enormous energy is released which is due to

a.) conversion of chemical energy into heat energy
b.) conversion of mechanical energy into nuclear energy
c.) conversion of mass into energy
d.) conversion of neutrons into protons
186.

What differentiates a prokaryote from a eukaryote?

a.) a eukaryotic cell possesses a genetic material while a prokaryotic cell does
not.
b.) both have a membrane system responsible for delineating the cell from its
surroundings
c.) a eukaryotic cell consists of a true nucleus that is membrane-bound while a
prokaryotic cell does not
d.) algae and yeasts are examples of organisms made up of eukaryotic cells
while bacteria are prokaryotic in nature
187.

If the pressure exerted on a confined ideal gas is doubled, what happens to
its temperature and volume, taken separately?

NOT FOR SALE (Last updated: May 22, 2020)

a.) doubled; halved
b.) remains the same
188.

What is the kinetic energy of a 500-kg car moving at 3.0 m/s?

a.) 1.50 kJ
189.

b.) 1.75 kJ

c.) 2.00 kJ

d.) 2.25 kJ

Given two vectors 𝐴 = 4𝑚𝑖̂ + 3𝑚𝑗̂ and 𝐵 = 2𝑚𝑖̂ − 3𝑚𝑗̂, what is 𝐴 + 𝐵?
a.) 8.61𝑚

190.

c.) halved; halved
d.) halved; doubled

b.) 6𝑚𝑖̂

c.) 6𝑚

d.) 8.61𝑚𝑖̂

A stone is thrown into the air at an angle. Neglecting air resistance, what is
the stone’s velocity upon reaching its maximum height?

a.) zero
b.) equal to the horizontal component of its initial velocity
c.) equal to the vertical component of its initial velocity
d.) equal to the acceleration due to gravity
191.

A mixture shows the following properties: Its particles do not settle down,
can not be filtered, and cannot be seen by the naked eye. The mixture does
not show the Tyndall effect. Which of the following best describe this
mixture?

a.) homogeneous
192.

b.) solution

d.) suspension

Salt water has a density greater than that of pure water. What does this
mean?
a.) Salt water is heavier than water
b.) Salt water is lighter than water

193.

c.) colloid

c.) Salt water is as heavy as water
d.) Salt water has more volume than
water

Weathering is the process that changes solid rock into sediments. With
weathering, rock is disintegrated. It breaks into pieces. However, rocks on
the moon are not being weathered. Which of the following is the reason for
this?
a.) There is no atmosphere on the
moon

NOT FOR SALE (Last updated: May 22, 2020)

c.) There is no volcano on the moon

b.) There is no water on the moon

194.

What is probability that a father with a homogenous dominant trait and a
mother with the same homogeneous dominant trait will produce an offspring
with the recessive trait?

a.) 25%
195.

b.) 15%

c.) 0%

d.) 100%

The velocity of a car changes from 70 m/s north to 50 m/s north in 5
seconds. The magnitude of the car’s acceleration is
.

a.) 24 𝑚⁄𝑠 2
196.

d.) The gravity on the moon is very
small

b.) 4 𝑚⁄𝑠 2

c.) 4 𝑚⁄𝑠 2

d.) 24 𝑚⁄𝑠 2

When an iron nail gets rusted, iron oxide is formed

.

a.) without any change in the weight of the nail
b.) with decrease in the weight of the nail
c.) with increase in the weight of the nail
d.) without any change in color and weight of the nail
197.

What force is needed to make a 2 kg rock accelerate at 0.5 𝑚⁄𝑠 2 ?

a.) 1 N
198.

b.) 2 N

c.) 3 N

d.) 4 N

What will happen if the white blood cells are deteriorating?

a.) Oxygen cells will not be transported
b.) The nerve impulses will not be carried to the brain
c.) The harmful bacteria in the body will not be destroyed
d.) There will be no production of hormone to clot the blood
199.

Metal atoms tend to

a.) lose electrons; gain protons
b.) gain protons; lose electrons
200.

while nonmetal atoms tend to
c.) lose electrons; gain electrons
d.) gain electrons; lose protons

The primary difference between RNA and DNA is that

a.) DNA is single-stranded and RNA is double-stranded
b.) DNA is a double-stranded helix and RNA is single-stranded
NOT FOR SALE (Last updated: May 22, 2020)

.

.

c.) The sugar in DNA is ribose
d.) The sugar is both RNA and DNA are deoxyribose
201.

When you go to a higher altitude, what happens to the boiling point of the
water?

a.) increases
202.

b.) stays the same

c.) decreases

d.) fluctuates

Oil and water are immiscible such that when both are placed in a single
container oil “floats” on top of the water. Why is this so?

a.) Oil is a nonpolar substance while water is polar
b.) Oil is a polar substance while water is a nonpolar substance
c.) Oil is less dense than water
d.) Oil is denser than water
203.

Aside from the properties of the molecules involved, the principal factors that
affect the speed of a chemical reaction are:
I. presence of catalyst
II. the temperature at which the reaction occurs
III. the concentration of the reactants
turbulence in the reacting medium
a.) II, III
b.) I, III
c. III
d.) none of the above

204.

If both the force and area of application of the said force are halved, the
pressure will
.
a.) increase by a factor of 2
b.) decrease by a factor of 2

205.

c.) diminish by square root of 2
d.) remain constant

Which of the following does not describe a prokaryotic cell?

a.) Their DNA is not bound by a nuclear membrane
b.) They do not possess a true nucleus
c.) A plasma membrane surrounds and encloses the prokaryotic cell
d.) They possess an extensive endoplasmic reticulum
206.

Which of the following equations does not belong to the group?

a.) 𝐶 + 𝑂2 → 𝐶𝑂2
b.) 2𝐾𝐶𝑙𝑂3 → 2𝐾𝐶𝑙 + 3𝑂2
NOT FOR SALE (Last updated: May 22, 2020)

c.) 𝐶𝐻4 + 2𝑂2 → 𝐶𝑂2 + 2𝐻2 𝑂
d.) 2𝑀𝑔 + 𝑂2 → 2𝑀𝑔𝑂

207.

Which of the following statement is true?

a.) Orbitals make up a subshell; subshells make up a shell
b.) Subshells make up a shell; shells make up an orbital
c.) Shells make up an orbital; orbitals make up a subshell
d.) None of the above
208.

How much time should it take for a traveling bullet to hit the ground
compared to a bullet dropped from rest?

a.) The traveling bullet will take longer to hit the ground than the bullet dropped
from rest
b.) The traveling bullet will hit the ground at the same time as the bullet dropped
from rest
c.) The traveling bullet will hit the ground before the bullet dropped from rest
d.) The traveling bullet moves so fast that it will never hit the ground
209.

The moon is said to light up the night skies. What gives the moon this ability
to shine?
a.) The sun’s reflection off the moon
b.) Radiation is produced by the moon’s atmosphere
c.) Radiation from the Sun that is absorbed by the moon
d.) The luminous substance found on the moon’s surface

210.

Which of the following is not a chemical reaction?

a.) burning paper
b.) rusting of metal
211.

c.) ripening of fruit
d.) freezing carbon dioxide

How does the esophagus bring food down to the stomach in space, where
there is zero gravity?

a.) There is micro-gravity in space caused by the centrifugal force created by
orbiting around Earth
b.) Peristalsis
c.) Mucous membranes in the esophagus help the food go down
d.) Food is liquefied and makes use of osmosis in the esophagus to bring down
food.
212.

Which of the following will NOT increase the speed of a reaction?

NOT FOR SALE (Last updated: May 22, 2020)

a.) Catalyst

213.

b.) thrice as great

c.) the same

d.) four times as great

What happens to the amount of energy as the level rises in the food
pyramid?

a.) increases

215.

c.) Carbonates in water d.) Increasing
surface area

If the mass of the Earth were twice as it is now, the gravitational force
between it and the sun would be
.

a.) twice as great
214.

b.) Heat

b.) decreases

c.) remains
constant

d.) decrease then increase

In which population would you expect the most rapid evolutionary change?

a.) a small population with a high mutation rate in a changing environment
b.) a small population with a low mutation rate in a stable environment
c.) a large population with a high mutation rate in a changing environment
d.) a large population with a low mutation rate in a stable environment
216.

Global climate change can be attributed to the increase in what two gases
produced by human activities?

a.) nitrous oxide and sulfur dioxide
b.) methane and carbon dioxide
217.

In an atomic nucleus, neutrons and protons are held together by

a.) gravitational forces
b.) exchange forces
218.

c.) ozone and carbon dioxide
d.) ozone and methane

c.) coulombic forces
d.) magnetic forces

Which of the statements below does not explain the movements of the
earth’s crust?
a.) Earthquakes that originate beneath the sea can produce tsunamis
b.) The mantle beneath the earth’s crust is made of plastic materials that have
convection currents
c.) The earth’s crust has cracked into huge plates which move slowly due to
convection currents in the mantle

NOT FOR SALE (Last updated: May 22, 2020)

d.) Many years of stress on the rock may fracture the crust causing one portion
to slide upward or downward with respect to the other
219.

A relationship between two living things by which one is benefited while the
other is neither harmed nor benefited is called
.
a.) Commensalism b.) Parasitism

220.

c.) Mutualism

d.) Competition

Cyanogen (𝐶2 𝑁2 ) can be prepared by a catalyzed phase reaction between
𝐻𝐶𝑁 and 𝑁𝑂2 . The products of the reaction are 𝐶2 𝑁2 , 𝑁𝑂, and 𝐻2 𝑂. What is
the balanced chemical equation?

a.) 4𝐻𝐶𝑁 + 2𝑁𝑂2 → 2𝐶2 𝑁2 + 4𝑁𝑂 + 2𝐻2 𝑂
b.) 2𝐻𝐶𝑁 + 𝑁𝑂2 → 𝐶2 𝑁2 + 𝑁𝑂 + 𝐻2 𝑂
c.) 4𝐻𝐶𝑁 + 𝑁𝑂3 → 2𝐶2 𝑁2 + 𝑁𝑂 + 2𝐻2 𝑂
d.) 2𝐻𝐶𝑁 + 3𝑁𝑂2 → 𝐶2 𝑁2 + 3𝑁𝑂 + 𝐻2 𝑂
221.

Simple, multicellular animals with tissues but no distinct organs. Commonly
known as sponges, they typically attach to rocks, shells, or coral. What are
they called?

a.) Placozoa
222.

b.) 180 N

c.) 120 N

d.) 20 N

b.) Temperature

c.) Time

d.) Velocity

Newton’s first law of motion states that “Every object remains at rest or in
motion in a straight line at constant speed unless acted upon by an
unbalanced force.” What is the net force acting on an airplane in level flight
at 500 kph due north?

a.) 100 N
225.

d.) Ctenophora

Which among the following does not belong to the group?

a.) Speed
224.

c.) Cnidaria

A baseball bat exerts a magnitude of force of 60 N on a ball. What is the
magnitude of force exerted by the ball on the bat?

a.) 60 N
223.

b.) Porifera

b.) 490 N

c.) 980 N

Which is not true about moon and tides?

NOT FOR SALE (Last updated: May 22, 2020)

d.) 0 N

a.) When the moon is close to earth, the lesser the effect of gravity
b.) When the moon and earth are in line, the highest tides occur on earth
c.) When earth and moon are at right angles, the lowest tides occur on earth
d.) There are two high tides at opposite sides of the earth and two low tides at
the other
226.

The tendency of an object to resist changes in motion is dependent on
a.) Weight

227.

d.) Mass

b.) 2 Ω

c.) 3 Ω

d.) 4 Ω

A rally driver has 5 seconds to stop his car which traveling at a speed of 20
m/s. What is his average acceleration?

a.) 4 𝑚⁄𝑠 2
229.

c.) Speed

The figure below shows resistors connected in series and parallel. If the total
resistance from A to B is 8 Ω, find the resistance of R.

a.) 1 Ω
228.

b.) Temperature

b.) 3 𝑚⁄𝑠 2

c.) 1 𝑚⁄𝑠 2

d.) 0.25 𝑚⁄𝑠 2

Most plants are not suitable for human consumption. This is because we do
not possess the ability to digest them properly. Why is this so?

a.) They are poisonous
b.) We can’t chew them properly
c.) They have a high concentration of cellulose
d.) Plants have an anti-digestion substance in them
230.

Which of the following is NOT a chemical change?

a.) Compression of carbon
b.) Mixing zinc and HCI
231.

c.) Burning of wood
d.) Decomposition of leaves

A heavy ball and a plastic ball of equal diameters were dropped from a
height of 30 meters. Which will hit the ground first?

NOT FOR SALE (Last updated: May 22, 2020)

a.) They will hit the ground at the same c.) The plastic ball will hit the ground
time
first
b.) The heavy ball will hit the ground
d.) It depends on the air under each
first
ball
232.

Dante walks 0.5 km north. Starting from the same point, Richie walks 1.2 km
east. What would be the distance separating the two boys?

a.) 0.7 km
233.

b.) 0.9 km

c.) 1.1 km

d.) 1.3 km

Gon wants to know which is stronger, Bisuke’s punch or Killua’s. Using the
scientific method, how should Gon setup his controlled setup?
a.) Let Bisuke and Killua fight till one of them wins
b.) Let Bisuke and Killua punch him then compare which is more painful
c.) Let Bisuke and Killua punch the same object a number of times then
compare the damage done
d.) None of the above

234.

An advantage of sexual reproduction over asexual reproduction is that it:

a.) increases mutation rate

c.) increases genetic variability in a
population
b.) reduces the offspring’s risk of death d.) all of the above
during development
235.

Two populations may or may not affect each other. What do you call the
interaction where in neither population affect each other?

a.) Mutualism

b.) Competition

NOT FOR SALE (Last updated: May 22, 2020)

c.) Commensalism

d.) Neutralism

MATHEMATICS

NOT FOR SALE (Last updated: May 22, 2020)

236.

Jeb is 14 years younger than Ed. In 6 years, Ed will be thrice as old as Jeb.
How old is Jeb 4 years from now?
a.) 15

237.

c.) 5

b.) 40

c.) 30

Simplify the following expression:
a.) 4+5𝑥𝑥+3
b.) 4+5𝑥𝑥+3

240.

d.) 27

If the lengths of the sides of a square are tripled, what is the effect on its
area?
a.) The area will increase thrice.
b.) The area will increase 19 times.

239.

d.) 9

Thrice the larger of two numbers is five more than five times the smaller, and
the sum of six times the larger and five times the smaller is 265. What is the
larger number?
a.) 44

238.

b.) 19

c.) The area will increase 9 times.
d.) The area will remain the same.
4
√𝑥+3

+

√5𝑥
.
√𝑥+3

c.) 4+5𝑥𝑥+3
d.) 3𝑥𝑥+3

̅̅̅̅ ; ̅̅̅̅
̅̅̅̅ = 𝐴𝐶
Given the figure, 𝐵𝐷
𝐴𝐷 = ̅̅̅̅
𝐴𝐵 = 8. Find ̅̅̅̅
𝐶𝐷.
a.) 8√2
b.) 8√3
c.) 8 + 8√2
d.) 8 + 8√3

241.

Divide 12𝑥 7 𝑦 3 + 8𝑥 6 𝑦 4 − 24𝑥 8 𝑦 9 by 2𝑥 4 𝑦 2 .
a.) 6𝑥 3 𝑦 + 4𝑥 2 𝑦 2 − 12𝑥 4 𝑦 7
b.) 6𝑥 3 𝑦 + 8𝑥 2 𝑦 2 − 12𝑥 4 𝑦 7

242.

c.) −6𝑥 3 𝑦 − 4𝑥 2 𝑦 2 + 12𝑥 4 𝑦 7
d.) −6𝑥 3 𝑦 − 8𝑥 2 𝑦 2 + 12𝑥 4 𝑦 7

What is the value of x in the diagram shown?
a.) 10
b.) 5
5
c.)
7
d.) 7

NOT FOR SALE (Last updated: May 22, 2020)

What is the first term of an arithmetic sequence whose 19th and 12th terms
are 417 and 319 respectively?

243.

a.) 165
244.

b.) 242

d.) 7

What is the sum of the first seven terms in the arithmetic progression whose
first four terms are -7, -3, 1, and 5?
a.) 18

245.

b.) 56

c.) 35

d.) 81

If x and y are positive integers where x > y, which of the following is always
true?
a.)

246.

c.) 98

𝑦2

𝑦

𝑥

𝑥

>
2

b.)

𝑦2

𝑥2

𝑥

𝑦2

>
2

c.)

𝑥2

𝑥

𝑦

𝑦

>
2

d.)

𝑥2

𝑥3

𝑦

𝑦3

>
2

Suppose that ∠𝐴𝐵𝐶 and ∠𝐴𝐶𝐵 are equal, what is the value of x if 𝐴𝐸 = 3𝑥 +
4; 𝐶𝐸 = 𝑦 − 3; 𝐵𝐸 = 2𝑥 + 1; 𝐷𝐸 = 2𝑦 + 5.
a.) 9
b.) -9
c.) 17
d.) -17

247.

The sum of four consecutive multiples of 7 is 1582. What is the smallest
among those integers?
a.) 385

248.

c.) 364

d.) 399

Kevin can finish cleaning their room for about 36 minutes. When his brother
Ben helps him, it takes them 9 minutes to complete cleaning. How many
minutes would it take Ben to clean their room alone?
a.) 715

249.

b.) 420

b.) 15

c.) 18

d.) 12

c.) 3.25

d.) 13

Solve for x: log 2 (4𝑥 − 12) = 5.
a.) 9.25

b.) 11

NOT FOR SALE (Last updated: May 22, 2020)

250.

A rectangular solid with dimensions 2, 8, and x has the same volume as a
cube with side length of 4. What is the value of x?
a.) 4

251.

c.) 20 minutes

d.) 17.25 minutes

b.) 90

c.) 96

d.) 88

b.) −16√2

c.) 0

d.) 5√2 − 25√3

Roy is 13 years older than Sam. In 5 years, the sum of Roy’s age and twice
that of Sam’s age is 79. What is Sam’s age now?
a.) 30

255.

b.) 15.4 minutes

Simplify 3√2 + 2√18 − 5√50.
a.) 16√2

254.

d.) 16

The sum of five consecutive even integers is 470. What is the smallest
among those integers?
a.) 84

253.

c.) 8

Jack alone can carry a pail of water uphill for 40 minutes. Jill can do the
same for 25 minutes. How long will it take for both of them go reach the peak
of the hill if Jill helps his friend Jack?
a.) 22.5 minutes

252.

b.) 2

b.) 17

c.) 32

c.) 22

The width of a rectangle is thrice the length and is equal to the side of a
square. Which of these statements is true?
a.) The area of the square is 1⁄9 times that of the rectangle.
b.) The area of the square is 1⁄3 times that of the rectangle.
c.) The area of the rectangle is 1⁄9 times that of the square.
d.) The area of the rectangle is 1⁄3 times that of the square.

256.

Ben and Kevin arrange to meet on the highway connecting their hometowns.
Ben drives at 45 kph and Kevin at 35 kph. They leave their homes which are
120 kilometers apart at the same time. In how many hours will they meet?
a.) 1

b.) 1.5

NOT FOR SALE (Last updated: May 22, 2020)

c.) 2

d.) 2.5

257.

Sam, Ton, Paul can finish a job in 3 hours. If Sam does the job alone, he can
finish it in 6 hours. If Ton does the job alone, he can finish it in 8 hours. How
long will it take for Paul to finish the job alone?
a.) 12

258.

b.) 8

c.) 4

d.) 10

b.) 4500 liters

c.) 5000 liters

d.) 5500 liters

b.) 40

c.) 30

d.) 27

b.) 2

c.) 1

d.) 1.5

What is the distance between two endpoints, A (-3, 2) and B (1, 5)?
a.) 0

264.

d.) 22

Car A heads north at 45 kph. Exactly 12 minutes after, car B follows at a
steady speed of 54 kph. How long does it take for car B to overtake car A?
a.) 3

263.

c.) 13

Thrice the larger of two numbers is five more than five times the smaller, and
the sum of six times the larger and five times the smaller is 265. What is the
larger number?
a.) 44

262.

b.) 19

A tank contains 9000 liters of a solution that is 30% acid. How much water
should be added to make a solution that is 20% acid?
a.) 3000 liters

261.

d.) 18

Kaye is 24 years old. Her cousin, Pia is 9 years old. In how many years will
Kaye be double Pia’s age?
a.) 6

260.

c.) 24

Joy is 9 years older than Leo. Three years ago, the sum of their ages was
29. How old is Joy now?
a.) 10

259.

b.) 16

b.) 3

c.) 4

d.) 5

Two cars started from the same point at 4:11 AM. They travelled in opposite
directions at 35 mph and 45 mph respectively. At what time will they be 576
miles apart?
a.) 10:12 AM

b.) 10:23 AM

NOT FOR SALE (Last updated: May 22, 2020)

c.) 11:23 AM

d.) 11:12 AM

265.

A man travels 6 miles an hour. After traveling for 4 hours another man starts
at the same place, following at the rate of 9 miles an hour. How long will it
take for the second man to overtake the first?
a.) 6 hours

266.

If 𝑓(𝑥) =
a.) 1

267.

c.) 2

d.) 3

b.) 3.6

c.) 4.2

d.) 2.8

b.) 85

c.) 79

d.) 76

b.) 9

c.) 18

d.) 27

b.) -4

c.) 4

d.) -0.25

If x and y are negative integers where x > y, which of the following has the
highest value?
a.) 𝑥3𝑦

272.

b.) 8

Find the slope of the line from A (2, 5) and B (6, 21)
a.) 0.25

271.

and 𝑓(𝑥 + 3) = 96, what is x?

A coconut tree is 45 years old, and an acacia tree is 27 years old. How many
years ago was the coconut tree thrice as old as the acacia tree?
a.) 3

270.

2

d.) 10 hours

Given the arithmetic progression 7, 10, 13, 16, …, what will be the 26th term?
a.) 82

269.

3𝑥 3

c.) 9 hours

A pool can be filled by pipe A in 180 minutes and by pipe B in 360 minutes.
When the pool is full, it can be drained by pipe C in 720 minutes. If the pool
is initially empty and all three pipes are open, how many hours will it take to
fill up the pool?
a.) 2.4

268.

b.) 8 hours

b.) 𝑦−𝑥

c.) −𝑥𝑦2

d.) 𝑥𝑦3

c.) 31.5

d.) 7.1

21 is 150% of what number?
a.) 0.7

b.) 14

NOT FOR SALE (Last updated: May 22, 2020)

273.

The expression

𝑥2𝑦4𝑧
𝑥 5 𝑦𝑧 2

a.) 𝑥 −7 𝑦 5 𝑧 −3
274.

b.) 87

d.) 6

b.) 18 minutes

c.) 24 minutes

d.) 15 minutes

b.) 1⁄5

c.) √5

d.) 1⁄√5

What is the common difference of an arithmetic sequence whose 26th and
15th terms are 325 and 138 respectively?
b.) 17

c.) 19

d.) 15

A chemist has 600 g of salt solution that is 12% salt. How many grams of
20% solution must be added to obtain a 15% solution of salt?
b.) 180

8−2⁄3 is equal to
a.) 4

281.

c.) 7

6

a.) 720
280.

d.) 75

Simplify √125.

a.) 14
279.

d.) 𝑥 −3 𝑦 3 𝑧 −1

It takes Kaye 30 minutes to water the plants in the garden. Marie can water
the same garden for 45 minutes. How long will it take if they water than
plants together?

a.) 5
278.

c.) 93

b.) 8

a.) 12 minutes
277.

c.) 𝑥 3 𝑦 −3 𝑧

Solve for x in the equation: 42𝑥 = 8𝑥+3 .
a.) 9

276.

b.) 𝑥 7 𝑦 −5 𝑧 3

The first term of an arithmetic progression is 3 and the common difference is
6. What is the value of the 14th term?
a.) 81

275.

is equal to?

c.) 360

d.) 540

c.) √4

d.) 1⁄√4

.
b.) 1/4

Paulo earned 83 in his first two quizzes, 79 for the third, and 85 for the
fourth. What should he earn for the fifth quiz to earn an average for 85 for his
five quizzes?

NOT FOR SALE (Last updated: May 22, 2020)

a.) 88
282.

b.) 36

c.) 6√2

d.) 62

b.) 7

c.) 8

d.) 9

b.) 16

c.) 15

d.) 14

b.) 22%

c.) 15%

d.) 18.6%

A soft drink factory worker has 400 g of sugar solution that is 9% sugar. How
many kilograms of 27% sugar solution must be added to obtain a 24%
solution of sugar?
a.) 0.4

288.

d.) 12 miles

What is the alcohol percentage of the mixture that is mixed from 200 L of
15% alcohol solution with 300 L of 22% alcohol solution?
a.) 19.2%

287.

c.) 15 miles

The first term of an arithmetic progression is 7 and the common difference is
-4. What term is -57?
a.) 17

286.

b.) 9 miles

How many pounds of milk powder that cost $5.20 per pound must be mixed
with 9 pounds of milk powder that cost $2.70 per pound to make a mixture
that costs $3.70 per pound?
a.) 6

285.

d.) 100

The area of a right triangle is 18. One of its angles is 45°. What is the
hypotenuse of the triangle?
a.) 32

284.

c.) 95

A student rides away from his home going to school in an automobile at a
rate of 36 miles an hour and walks back fast at a rate of 7.2 miles an hour.
The round trip took 2 hours. How far does he ride?
a.) 18 miles

283.

b.) 90

b.) 0.8

c.) 1

d.) 2

If Rose saves P15.00 on the first week and adds P6.00 each week, how
much will she save on the last week of the fourth month?
a.) P98.00

b.) P100.00

NOT FOR SALE (Last updated: May 22, 2020)

c.) P105.00

d.) P102.00

289.

In the right triangle ABC, what is the value of sin 𝜃?
a.) 1213
b.) 513
c.) 125
d.) 512

290.

In the same figure, what is the value of tan 𝜃?
a.) 12⁄13

291.

b.) 7

b.) 111

b.) 𝑎𝑏

d.) 9

c.) 113

d.) 101

c.) 𝑎+𝑏+2

d.) 𝑏+2𝑎

Multiply (3𝑥 + 2𝑦) by (4𝑥 − 3𝑦)
a.) 12𝑥 2 + 17𝑥𝑦 − 6𝑦 2
b.) 12𝑥 2 − 17𝑥𝑦 − 6𝑦 2

295.

c.) 8

If 𝑎 and 𝑏 are both odd numbers, then which of the following must be an
even number?
a.) 𝑎+𝑏−3

294.

d.) 5⁄12

The sum of four consecutive odd integers is 432. What is the largest among
those integers?
a.) 105

293.

c.) 12⁄5

In geometric progression 2, 6, 18, 54, … how many terms are added if the
sum is 19682?
a.) 6

292.

b.) 5⁄13

c.) 12𝑥 2 + 𝑥𝑦 − 6𝑦 2
d.) 12𝑥 2 − 𝑥𝑦 − 6𝑦 2

What is the 20th term of an arithmetic sequence whose 33th and 19th terms
are 104 and 48 respectively?
a.) 52

b.) 54

NOT FOR SALE (Last updated: May 22, 2020)

c.) 72

d.) 74

ANSWER KEY:

LANGUAGE PROFICIENCY
1. C, establishing
2. A, nor
3. C, went
4. C
5. E
6. B
7. B, refers
8. B, has
9. C, to solve
10. E
11. C, this
12. D, supposed
13. C, rests
14. C, Von Braun's of NASA
15. C, passers
16. B
17. A
18. B, were
19. B, plan
20. B, play
21. B
22. A, Kung hindi
23. B, amused
24. D, pick
25. C, her
26. D, as careful
27. E
28. B, effect
29. D
30. C, supposed to
31. D
32. B
33. C
34. C
35. A
36. A
37. B
NOT FOR SALE (Last updated: May 22, 2020)

38. A
39. A
40. A
41. A
42. B
43. A
44. A
45. B
46. C
47. B
48. B
49. A
50. C
51. A
52. B
53. C
54. A
55. B
56. B
57. C
58. B
59. A
60. C
61. B, to enjoin means to issue an order or command; to direct or impose with
authority
62. C, virago means a bold, impudent, turbulent woman
63. D, to efface means to rub out, erase
64. D, a ravine is a deep narrow canyon
65. D, to vivify means to give or bring life to
66. C, a yearling is a young animal past its first year but not yet two years old
67. A, untimely means happening before the proper time
68. B, zenith means the highest point of any path or course
69. B, an accolade is an award or a special acknowledgement signifying approval
or distinction
70. C, to abdicate means to formally relinquish or surrender power, office or
responsibility
71. A, compunction means a feeling of uneasiness or regret caused by a sense of
guilt, remorse
72. C, rustic means rural; rough; made from rough limbs or trees
73. B, valorous means courageous, valiant
74. D, motif is a recurrent theme or form in an artistic or literary work
75. B, to desiccate means to dry out thoroughly
NOT FOR SALE (Last updated: May 22, 2020)

76. D, relinquish means give up
77. A, oppressive means unreasonably burdensome, heavy
78. A, to rally means to come together for a common purpose
79. C, animosity means bitter, open hostility or enmity; energetic dislike
80. D, to extricate is to release from an entanglement or difficulty
81. B, to accost means to approach and speak to someone, usually in a bold and
aggressive manner as with demand
82. D, litigious means inclined to disagree or dispute, especially in lawsuits
83. B, indemnity is a protection from loss or damage; immunity from punishment
84. A, to haggle means to bargain, such as over a price, or dispute in a petty way
85. B, congenial means having a friendly or pleasant disposition, sociable
READING COMPREHENSION
86. B
87. C
88. B
89. B
90. B
91. B
92. D
93. D
94. A
95. A
96. D
97. C
98. B
99. B
100. A
101. A
102. D
103. C
104. D
105. C
106. D
107. C
108. D
109. C
110. D
111. D
112. D
113. A
NOT FOR SALE (Last updated: May 22, 2020)

114. C
115. D
116. D
117. D
118. D
119. B
120. D
121. A
122. D
123. A
124. D
125. D
126. D
127. A
128. D
129. D
130. A
131. B
132. D
133. D
134. A
135. B
136. B
137. D
138. C
139. B
140. C
141. C
142. D
143. D
144. D
145. D
146. C
147. C
148. D
149. A
150. C
151. D
152. C
153. A
154. B
155. C
NOT FOR SALE (Last updated: May 22, 2020)

156. B
157. C
158. B
159. A
160. A
161. C
162. C
163. B
164. A
165. C
166. B
167. A
168. A
169. C
170. D
171. C
172. B
173. D
174. C
175. A
SCIENCE
176. C
177. A, 𝐺𝑃𝐸 = 𝑚𝑔ℎ: the gravitational potential energy is directly proportional to
height, so as an object is in a high place, it has a high GPE as well
178. A,
179. C, based on the equation, there are 3 moles of 𝐻3 in 1 mole of 𝑁2 . So 2.5 * 3 =
7.5 moles of 𝐻3
180. B
181. D
182. C
183. A
184. B
185. C
186. C
187. A, According to Boyle’s law, at constant temperature, the volume of a gas is
inversely proportional to the amount of pressure exerted on it. If the pressure is
doubled, volume will decrease.
1
1
188. D, 𝐾𝐸 = 𝑚𝑣 2 = (500)(3.0)2 = 2250 𝐽 = 2.25 𝑘𝐽
2
2
189. B, add them with their like terms (in this case, the 𝑖̂’s and 𝑗̂’s)
𝐴 + 𝐵 = (4𝑚 + 2𝑚)𝑖̂ + (3𝑚 + (−3𝑚))𝑗̂ = 6𝑚𝑖̂ + 0𝑚𝑗̂ = 6𝑚𝑖̂
NOT FOR SALE (Last updated: May 22, 2020)

190. B
191. B
192. A
193. A
194. C
𝑣𝑓 −𝑣𝑖

50−70

−20

195. C, 𝑎 = |
|=|
| = | | = 4 𝑚 ⁄𝑠 2
𝑡
5
5
196. C
197. A, 𝐹 = 𝑚𝑎 = (2)(0.5) = 1 𝑁
198. C
199. C
200. B
201. C
202. C
203. D
204. D
205. C
206. B, this is the only balanced chemical equation
207. A
208. B
209. A
210. D
211. B
212. C
213. A
214. B
215. A
216. B
217. B
218. D
219. A
220. B
221. B
222. A, Newton’s third law of motion (EQUAL and opposite reaction)
223. D
224. D, 𝐹 = 𝑚𝑎. The problem states that the plane is moving at a constant speed.
It means that it has zero acceleration. Substituting zero to the equation will yield
a magnitude of force of zero.
225. A
226. D
227. A, in series circuit, the total resistance is equal to the sum of all resistors. In
parallel circuit, total resistance is equal to the sum of reciprocal of each resistor.
In the diagram, the two 1 Ω resistors together with the unknown resistor R are
NOT FOR SALE (Last updated: May 22, 2020)

1

1

1

1

connected in parallel. To obtain its resistance, + + = 2Ω + . The total
1Ω
1Ω
𝑅
𝑅
resistance of that parallel circuit is in series with the resistors 2Ω and 3Ω. We are
given with the total resistance of the circuit as 8Ω. So,
1
8Ω = 2Ω + (2Ω + ) + 3Ω
𝑅
1
8Ω = 7Ω +
𝑅
1
8Ω − 7Ω =
𝑅
1Ω = 𝑅
𝑣𝑓 −𝑣𝑖

0−20

228. A, 𝑎𝑎𝑣𝑒 = |
|=|
|=4
𝑡
5
229. C
230. A
231. A
232. D, √0.52 + 1.22
233. C
234. D
235. D
MATHEMATICS
236. C
Today
𝑥
𝑥 − 14
Solve for 𝑥

Ed
Jeb

𝑥 + 6 = 3(𝑥 − 8)
𝑥 + 6 = 3𝑥 − 24
−3𝑥 + 𝑥 = −24 − 6
−2𝑥 = −30
𝑥 = 15
Substitute 𝑥 in Jeb’s age today:
𝑥 − 14 = 15 − 14 = 1
In 4 years, Jeb will be 5 years old.
More examples: https://youtu.be/eC1_ImKDFNs and
https://youtu.be/L00UVok8Zqo
Or search in youtube: Age Problems Agham Liknayan
NOT FOR SALE (Last updated: May 22, 2020)

In 6 years
𝑥+6
𝑥−8

237. C
Let 𝑥 be the larger number; 𝑦 be the smaller
Solve for the systems of linear equation:
3𝑥 = 5𝑦 + 5 (1)
6𝑥 + 5𝑦 = 26 (2)
Multiply equation (1) by 2.
6𝑥 = 10𝑦 + 10 (3)
Substitute (3) to (2)
(10𝑦 + 10) + 5𝑦 = 26
𝑦 = 17
Substitute the value of 𝑦 to (1) and solve for 𝑥
𝑥 = 30
Related link: https://youtu.be/VTk-qhiC_ss
Or search in youtube: Number Word Problems Agham Liknayan
238. C
Area of a square is 𝑠 2
Making each side to its triple value is 3𝑠
So, (3𝑠)2 = 9𝑠 2
239. A
The rational numbers have similar denominators so combine them by copying
the denominator. The numerator cannot simply be added so copy them instead.
240. B
Link: https://youtu.be/aTfk6FOb7_4
Or search in youtube: Triangle Analysis Agham Liknayan
241. A, divide each monomial of 12𝑥 7 𝑦 3 + 8𝑥 6 𝑦 4 − 24𝑥 8 𝑦 9 by 2𝑥 4 𝑦 2 .
Link: https://youtu.be/eW5gs6Qfl9Q
Or search in youtube: Division of polynomials Agham Liknayan
NOT FOR SALE (Last updated: May 22, 2020)

242. B, solve for 𝑥 in 4𝑥 = 3𝑥 + 5
243. A
Use the formula: 𝑎𝑛 = 𝑎1 + (𝑛 − 1)𝑑
Solve for 𝑎1 and 𝑑 in the systems of equation:
417 = 𝑎1 + (19 − 1)𝑑
319 = 𝑎1 + (12 − 1)𝑑
Related link: https://youtu.be/ElSU3z6VjoA
Or search in youtube: Arithmetic Sequence Part 3 Agham Liknayan
244. C
Related link: https://youtu.be/wYhGsw8yFow
Or search in youtube: Arithmetic Sequence Part 1 Agham Liknayan
245. C, let 𝑥 = 2 & 𝑦 = 1.
246. B, 𝐴𝐸 = 𝐷𝐸 & 𝐵𝐸 = 𝐶𝐸. Solve for 𝑥 & 𝑦 in the systems of equation:
3𝑥 + 4 = 2𝑦 + 5 (𝐴𝐸 = 𝐷𝐸)
2𝑥 + 1 = 𝑦 − 3 (𝐵𝐸 = 𝐶𝐸)
247. A
Let
7𝑥 be the first integer
7𝑥 + 7 be the second integer
7𝑥 + 14 be the third integer

7𝑥 + 21 be the fourth integer
7𝑥 + 28 be the fifth integer

Solve for 𝑥 in the equation:
(7𝑥) + (7𝑥 + 7) + (7𝑥 + 14) + (7𝑥 + 21) + (7𝑥 + 28) = 1582
Finally, substitute 𝑥 in the first integer, 7𝑥
Link: https://youtu.be/cXFJ7bXvZEQ try also https://youtu.be/VTk-qhiC_ss
Or search in youtube: Number Word Problems Part 4 Agham Liknayan
248. D
Let 𝑥 be the time it takes for Ben to clean the room alone
1
1
1
Solve for 𝑥 in the equation: + =
36

𝑥

9

Related link: https://youtu.be/Tdl54I7ydqI
NOT FOR SALE (Last updated: May 22, 2020)

Or search in youtube: work problems agham liknayan
249. B
Apply the logarithmic property: if log 𝑎 𝑥 = 𝑏 then 𝑥 = 𝑎𝑏
Link: https://youtu.be/_pc3YmV34rA
Or search in youtube: Logarithmic Function Agham Liknayan
250. A
It was stated in the problem that
𝑉𝑜𝑙𝑢𝑚𝑒 𝑜𝑓 𝑟𝑒𝑐𝑡𝑎𝑛𝑔𝑢𝑙𝑎𝑟 𝑠𝑜𝑙𝑖𝑑 = 𝑣𝑜𝑙𝑢𝑚𝑒 𝑜𝑓 𝑎 𝑐𝑢𝑏𝑒
(2)(8)(𝑥) = (4)(4)(4)
Solve for 𝑥
251. B
Let 𝑥 be the time it takes if they carry the pail together
Related link: https://youtu.be/Tdl54I7ydqI
Or search in youtube: work problems agham liknayan
252. B
Let
2𝑥 be the first integer
2𝑥 + 2 be the second integer
2𝑥 + 4 be the third integer

2𝑥 + 6 be the fourth integer
2𝑥 + 8 be the fifth integer

Solve for 𝑥 in the equation:
(2𝑥) + (2𝑥 + 2) + (2𝑥 + 4) + (2𝑥 + 6) + (2𝑥 + 8) = 470
Link: https://youtu.be/0dFup4fhxlo try also https://youtu.be/VTk-qhiC_ss
Or search in youtube: Number Word Problems Part 3 Agham Liknayan
253. B, radicand may be simplified to a multiple of a pair of a perfect square and a
nonperfect square.
Link: https://youtu.be/YetHoSdb8Vw
Or search in youtube: Operations on Radical Numbers Agham Liknayan
254. B
Let 𝑥 be Sam’s age today
Today
NOT FOR SALE (Last updated: May 22, 2020)

In 5 years (+5)

𝑥
𝑥 + 13

Sam
Roy

𝑥+5
𝑥 + 18

Solve for 𝑥 in:
𝑥 + 18 + 2(𝑥 + 5) = 79
More examples: https://youtu.be/eC1_ImKDFNs and
https://youtu.be/L00UVok8Zqo
Or search in youtube: Age Problems Agham Liknayan
255. D
Area of a rectangle = Length * Width
Area of a square = Side * Side
Let 𝑊 be the width, 𝐿 be the length, 𝑆 be the side of the square
𝑊 = 3𝐿, 𝑊 = 𝑆 = 3𝐿
Area of the square = 𝑆 ∗ 𝑆 = 𝑊 ∗ 𝑊 = 𝑊 2 = (3𝐿)2 = 9𝐿2
Area of the rectangle: 𝐿 ∗ 𝑊 = 𝐿 ∗ 3𝐿 = 3𝐿2
Ratio:

𝐴𝑟𝑒𝑎 𝑜𝑓 𝑡ℎ𝑒 𝑟𝑒𝑐𝑡𝑎𝑛𝑔𝑙𝑒
𝐴𝑟𝑒𝑎 𝑜𝑓 𝑡ℎ𝑒 𝑠𝑞𝑢𝑎𝑟𝑒

=

3𝐿2
9𝐿2

=

1
3

256. B
𝑑𝑖𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑛𝑐𝑒 = 𝑠𝑝𝑒𝑒𝑑 ∗ 𝑡𝑖𝑚𝑒
Let 𝑡 be the time it takes for them to meet from 120 kilometers apart
Distance travelled by Ben: 45𝑡
Distance travelled by Kevin: 35t
They are 120 kilometers apart, so add their distances
45𝑡 + 35𝑡 = 120
Solve for 𝑡
Link: https://youtu.be/fkAgzoOdvK4
Or search in youtube: Distance Problem Agham Liknayan
257. C
Let 𝑥 be the time it takes for Paul to finish the job alone
Solve for 𝑥 in the equation:
1 1 1 1
+ + =
6 8 𝑥 3
Link: https://youtu.be/Tdl54I7ydqI
Or search in youtube: work problems agham liknayan
NOT FOR SALE (Last updated: May 22, 2020)

258. D
Let 𝑥 be Leo’s age today
Leo
Joy

Today
𝑥
𝑥+9

3 years ago (-3)
𝑥−3
𝑥+6

Solve for 𝑥 in the equation: (𝑥 − 3) + (𝑥 + 6) = 29
Substitute 𝑥 in 𝑥 + 9
More examples: https://youtu.be/eC1_ImKDFNs and
https://youtu.be/L00UVok8Zqo
Or search in youtube: Age Problems Agham Liknayan
259. A
Let 𝑡 be the time it takes
Kaye
Pia

Today
24
9

In 𝑡 years (+𝑡)
24 + 𝑡
9+𝑡

Solve for 𝑡 in the equation: 24 + 𝑡 = 2(9 + 𝑡)
More examples: https://youtu.be/eC1_ImKDFNs and
https://youtu.be/L00UVok8Zqo
Or search in youtube: Age Problems Agham Liknayan
260. B
The water has 0% concentration
Solve for 𝑥in the equation: (9000)(0.3) + (𝑥)(0) = (9000 + 𝑥)(0.2)
Related link: https://youtu.be/k6JIKJKwRHE
Or search in youtube: Mixture Problem Agham Liknayan
261. C
Solve for 𝑥 & 𝑦 in the systems of equation:
3𝑥 = 5𝑦 + 5 and 6𝑥 + 5𝑦 = 265
Related link: https://youtu.be/VTk-qhiC_ss
Or search in youtube: Number Word Problems Part 1 Agham Liknayan
262. C
𝐷𝑖𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑛𝑐𝑒 = 𝑆𝑝𝑒𝑒𝑑 ∗ 𝑇𝑖𝑚𝑒
Let 𝑡 be the time for Car B; 𝑡 + 12 be the time for car A
Car
Speed
Time
NOT FOR SALE (Last updated: May 22, 2020)

Distance

A
B

𝑡 + 12
𝑡

45
54

45(𝑡 + 12)
54𝑡

Solve for 𝑡 in the equation: 45(𝑡 + 12) = 54𝑡
Link: https://youtu.be/fkAgzoOdvK4
Or search in youtube: Distance Problem Agham Liknayan
263. D
Use the distance formula: √(𝑥2 − 𝑥1 )2 + (𝑦2 − 𝑦1 )2
264. C
st

1
2nd

Speed
35
45

Time
𝑡
𝑡

Distance
35𝑡
45𝑡

Adding their distances lead to a total of 576 km. Solve for 𝑡 in the equation:
35𝑡 + 45𝑡 = 576
𝑡 = 7.2 ℎ𝑟𝑠
Convert 0.2 ℎ𝑟𝑠 to 𝑚𝑖𝑛𝑢𝑡𝑒𝑠
60 𝑚𝑖𝑛𝑢𝑡𝑒𝑠
0.2 ℎ𝑟𝑠 ∙
= 12 𝑚𝑖𝑛𝑢𝑡𝑒𝑠
1 ℎ𝑟
So, 𝑡 = 7 ℎ𝑜𝑢𝑟𝑠 𝑎𝑛𝑑 12 𝑚𝑖𝑛𝑢𝑡𝑒𝑠. Add it to 4:11 AM
Link: https://youtu.be/DZqrm3xnmkw
Or search in youtube: Distance Problem Agham Liknayan
265. B
Let 𝑡 be the time it takes for the 2nd man to overtake the 1st man
Man
Speed
Time
st
1
6
𝑡+4
nd
2
9
𝑡
Equate their distances and solve for 𝑡.
6(𝑡 + 4) = 9𝑡
Related link: https://youtu.be/fkAgzoOdvK4
Or search in youtube: Distance Problem Agham Liknayan
266. A
NOT FOR SALE (Last updated: May 22, 2020)

Distance
6(𝑡 + 4)
9𝑡

𝑓(𝑥 + 3) =

3(𝑥+3)3
2

; 𝑓(𝑥 + 3) = 96, so, solve for 𝑥 in the equation:
3(𝑥 + 3)3
= 96
2

Link: https://youtu.be/3jG-3PzGXRs
Or search in youtube: Composition of Functions Agham Liknayan
267. A
1 1
1
1
+ + (− ) =
𝐴 𝐵
𝐶
𝑥
Solve for 𝑥 in the equation:
1
1
1
1
+
−
=
180 360 720 𝑥
The value of 𝑥 that obtained here is in terms of minutes. Convert the value of 𝑥 to
hours.
Link: https://youtu.be/Tdl54I7ydqI
Or search in youtube: work problems agham liknayan
268. A
Use the formula: 𝑎𝑛 = 𝑎1 + (𝑛 − 1)𝑑.
Link: https://youtu.be/tJInz44Qtgo
Or search in youtube: Arithmetic Sequence Part 2 Agham Liknayan
269. C
𝒕 years ago (−𝒕)
45 − 𝑡
27 − 𝑡

Tree
Today
Coconut
45
Acacia
27
Solve for 𝑡 in the equation: 45 − 𝑡 = 3(27 − 𝑡)
More examples: https://youtu.be/eC1_ImKDFNs and
https://youtu.be/L00UVok8Zqo
Or search in youtube: Age Problems Agham Liknayan
270. C
𝑦 −𝑦
Use the formula for finding the slope of a line: 𝑚 = 2 1
𝑥2 −𝑥1

Link: https://youtu.be/HPxcFMSI3F4
Or search in youtube: Slope of a line Agham Liknayan
NOT FOR SALE (Last updated: May 22, 2020)

271. D, let 𝑥 = 2 & 𝑦 = 1. Substitute in all of the choices
272. B, solve for 𝑥 in the equation: 1.50𝑥 = 21
Link: https://youtu.be/ypIQ71Fuh6A
Or search in youtube: 21 is 150% Agham Liknayan
273. D, eliminate the common in the numerator and denominator. Take note of the
property that

𝑥𝑎
𝑥𝑏

= 𝑥 𝑎−𝑏

Link: https://youtu.be/Ti_yX7kjB70
Or search in youtube: Simplifying Rational Expressions Agham Liknayan
274. A, use the formula 𝑎𝑛 = 𝑎1 + (𝑛 − 1)𝑑. Substitute the values from the given and
solve for 𝑎𝑛 .
Related link: https://youtu.be/wYhGsw8yFow
Or search in youtube: Arithmetic Sequence Part 1 Agham Liknayan
275. A, this is one example of exponential function. Cancel out the similar bases. It
may be done if 4 is substituted by 22 and 8 by 23 . Finally, solve for 𝑥 in:
22(2𝑥) = 23(𝑥+3)
Link: https://youtu.be/sg1bdLUyiPA
Or search in youtube: Exponential Function Agham Liknayan
276. B
Solve for 𝑥 in the equation:
1
1
1
+
=
30 45 𝑥
Related link: https://youtu.be/Tdl54I7ydqI
Or search in youtube: work problems agham liknayan
6

6

3

1

277. C, 125 = 53 , so √125 = √53 = 56 = 52 = √5
Link: https://youtu.be/1qu1N6ANzl0
Or search in youtube: Simplifying Radical Numbers Agham Liknayan
278. B, use the formula 𝑎𝑛 = 𝑎1 + (𝑛 − 1)𝑑
Solve for 𝑑 in the systems of equation:
325 = 𝑎1 + (19 − 1)𝑑
NOT FOR SALE (Last updated: May 22, 2020)

138 = 𝑎1 + (15 − 1)𝑑
Related link: https://youtu.be/ElSU3z6VjoA
Or search in youtube: Arithmetic Sequence Part 3 Agham Liknayan
279. C, solve for 𝑥 in the equation: (600)(0.12) + (𝑥)(0.20) = (600 + 𝑥)(0.15)
Related link: https://youtu.be/k6JIKJKwRHE
Or search in youtube: Mixture Problem Agham Liknayan
280. B

8

2

−3

=

1
2
83

3

2
3

3

3

3

; 8 = 2 ; 8 = √82 = √(23 )2 = √26 = 22 ; So,

1
2
83

=

1
22

=

1
4

Link: https://youtu.be/md7zZREbRbs
Or search in youtube: Radical Numbers Agham Liknayan
281. C
Let 𝑥 be his score on the fifth quiz. Solve for 𝑥 in the equation:
83 + 83 + 79 + 85 + 𝑥
= 85
5
282. D
Use the formula 𝑑𝑖𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑛𝑐𝑒 = 𝑠𝑝𝑒𝑒𝑑 ∗ 𝑡𝑖𝑚𝑒
Let 𝑡 be the time while riding; 5𝑡 be the time while walking (because 36 ÷ 7.2 =
1
5). The round trip took 2 hours, so solve for 𝑡 in the equation 𝑡 + 5𝑡 = 2, 𝑡 = .
3
Substitute 𝑡 from the formula,
1
𝑑𝑖𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑛𝑐𝑒 = 36 ∗ = 12
3
Link: https://youtu.be/ADIJBVWwnaA
Or search in youtube: Distance Problem Agham Liknayan
283. C
45° − 45° − 90°
1
Area of a triangle = 𝑎𝑏
2
Since 45° − 45° − 90° has equal height and base, 𝑎 = 𝑏
1
So, area of a triangle= 𝑎2
2
1 2
18 = 𝑎
2
2
𝑎 = 36
NOT FOR SALE (Last updated: May 22, 2020)

𝑎=6
Finally, the hypotenuse is
ℎ = √6 2 + 6 2
ℎ = √72 = √36 ∙ 2
ℎ = 6√2
284. A, solve for 𝑥 in the equation: (𝑥)(5.20) + (9)(2.70) = (𝑥 + 9)(3.70)
Related link: https://youtu.be/k6JIKJKwRHE
Or search in youtube: Mixture Problem Agham Liknayan
285. A,
Use the formula 𝑎𝑛 = 𝑎1 + (𝑛 − 1)𝑑.
Solve for 𝑛 in the equation:
−57 = 7 + (𝑛 − 1)(−4)
Link: https://youtu.be/wYhGsw8yFow
Or search in youtube: Arithmetic Sequence Part 1 Agham Liknayan
286. A
Solve for 𝑥 in the equation: (200)(0.15) + (300)(0.22) = (500)(𝑥). Multiply the
answer by 100.
Related link: https://youtu.be/k6JIKJKwRHE
Or search in youtube: Mixture Problem Agham Liknayan
287. D
Solve for 𝑥 in the equation: (400)(0.09) + (𝑥)(0.27) = (400 + 𝑥)(0.24). The
answer is in terms of grams so convert it into kilograms.
Related link: https://youtu.be/k6JIKJKwRHE
Or search in youtube: Mixture Problem Agham Liknayan
288. C
Use the formula: 𝑎𝑛 = 𝑎1 + (𝑛 − 1)𝑑
Solve for 𝑎𝑛 in the equation: 𝑎𝑛 = 15 + (16 − 1)(6)
Link: https://youtu.be/Vi6u0EpWoTk
Or search in youtube: Arithmetic Sequence Part 4 Agham Liknayan
289. A
NOT FOR SALE (Last updated: May 22, 2020)

Link: https://youtu.be/Owi-jV4yEms
Or search in youtube: basics of trigonometric functions agham liknayan
290. C
Link: https://youtu.be/Owi-jV4yEms
Or search in youtube: basics of trigonometric functions agham liknayan
291. D, use the formula for geometric progression - 𝑆𝑛 =
6

18

54

𝑎1 (1−𝑟 𝑛 )
1−𝑟

𝑟 = = = = 3; 𝑎1 = 2; 𝑆𝑛 = 19682. Substitute in the equation and solve for
2
6
18
𝑛.
2(1 − 3𝑛 )
19682 =
1−3
2(1 − 3𝑛 )
19682 =
−2
19682 = −(1 − 3𝑛 )
−19682 = 1 − 3𝑛
−19682 − 1 = −3𝑛
−19683 = −3𝑛
19683 = 3𝑛
39 = 3𝑛
𝑛=9
292. B
Let
2𝑥 + 1 be the first odd integer
2𝑥 + 3 be the second odd integer

2𝑥 + 5 be the third odd integer
2𝑥 + 7 be the fourth odd integer

Solve for 𝑥 in the equation:
(2𝑥 + 1) + (2𝑥 + 3) + (2𝑥 + 5) + (2𝑥 + 7) = 432
Finally, substitute the value of 𝑥 in 2𝑥 + 7
Link: https://youtu.be/q3R6tlrcvA8 try also https://youtu.be/VTk-qhiC_ss
Or search in youtube: Number Word Problems Agham Liknayan
293. C, let 𝑎 = 4, 𝑏 = 2
294. D, use FOIL method
Link: https://youtu.be/E-CtMGgqJFE
Or search in youtube: Multiplication of binomials Agham Liknayan
NOT FOR SALE (Last updated: May 22, 2020)

295. A, use the formula 𝑎𝑛 = 𝑎1 + (𝑛 − 1)𝑑
Solve for 𝑎1 and 𝑑 from the systems of equation:
104 = 𝑎1 + (33 − 1)𝑑
48 = 𝑎1 + (19 − 1)𝑑
Substitute those values in 𝑎𝑛 : 𝑎𝑛 = 𝑎1 + (20 − 1)𝑑
Link: https://youtu.be/ElSU3z6VjoA
Or search in youtube: Arithmetic Sequence Part 3 Agham Liknayan

You may send an email regarding your score in this mock-exam

NOT FOR SALE (Last updated: May 22, 2020)

