UPCAT Review: Science I (General Science and Biology)
A. Review of General Science
I. Universe, Astronomy and Solar System
1. Solar System

2. Kepler’s Laws of Planetary Motion
a. The orbit of a planet is an ellipse with the Sun at one of the two foci.
b. A line segment joining a planet and the Sun sweeps out equal areas during equal intervals of time.
c. The square of the orbital period of a planet is proportional to the cube of the semi-major axis of its
orbit.
II. Geology
1. Rocks and Minerals
a. Classification of Rocks
i. Igneous: forms from cooled magma or lava.
1. Intrusive igneous rock (ex. granite) - forms in underground pockets
2. Extrusive igneous rock (ex. obsidian) - forms above ground
ii. Sedimentary: Erosion from water and weather carries deposits downstream which will
form layers. As pressure accumulates over thousands of years, the lower levels are
pressed into sedimentary rock.
1. Clastic sedimentary rocks (ex. sandstone) - formed from inorganic debris.
2. Organic sedimentary rocks (ex. limestone or coal) - formed from plant or animal
remains
3. Chemical sedimentary rock (ex. rock salt) - formed when dissolved materials
come out of solution.
iii. Metamorphic: Form when other types of rocks undergo extreme heat, pressure and
chemical processes deep in Earth's crust.
1. Foliated metamorphic rocks (ex. slate) form with visible layers or banded
striations from pressure.
2. Non-foliated metamorphic rocks (ex. marble ) form more irregular striations

b. Rock Cycle: Each form of rock can turn into the
other under the right circumstances, thereby
continuing the ever-shifting rock cycle.
i. Igneous and sedimentary rock 
metamorphic rock: high pressure and
heat
ii. Sedimentary and metamorphic rock 
igneous rock: melting back into magma
iii. Igneous and metamorphic rock 
sedimentary rock: erosion
c. Elements on the Earth’s Crust
Element name
Symbol % weight on Earth’s crust
Oxygen
O
47
Silicon
Si
28
Aluminum
Al
8
Iron
Fe
5
Calcium
Ca
3.5
Sodium
Na
3
Potassium
K
2.5
Magnesium
Mg
2
All other elements
1

Source:
http://www.rsc.org/Education/Teachers/Resource
s/jesei/minerals/students.htm

d. Minerals: substances formed naturally in the Earth with definite chemical composition and
structure. There are over 3000 minerals known. Some are rare and precious such as diamond,
while others are more ordinary, such as quartz.
e. Weathering: one of the destructive processes on earth (together with Erosion and Transportation);
exposes most rocks to a different physio-chemical environment from where they formed.
i. Mechanical weathering - which produces clasts of rock/mineral which are smaller than
the original, and of the same general composition. There are two basic processes:
1. Fracturing, which is like a hammer and produces angular clasts
2. Abrasion, which works like sandpaper and rounds off the rough edges.
ii. Chemical weathering - also produces smaller pieces, but of a different chemical
composition - the minerals have been changed in an attempt to be more in balance with
surface conditions. The most common product of chemical weathering is clay.
iii. Biological weathering - really isn't a type of its own; the actions of plants (and animals)
can and do lead to both mechanical and biological weathering.

f.

Layers of Soil

g. Mohs’ Scale of Hardness

2. Earth’s Surface (earthquakes, volcanoes, faults, ,mountains, plate tectonics)

a. Layers of the Earth
b. Crust - outermost layer of the Earth
i. Continental crust – make up land masses, 32-70km thick
ii. Oceanic crust – make up ocean floor, 8km thick

c. Stress – change shape and volume of the crust, leading to movement
and deformation
i. Compression - rocks are pushed together causing inc.
density and dec. volume
ii. Tension – rocks are pulled apart causing dec. density and
inc. volume
iii. Shearing – rocks are pushed in opposite directions causes
twisting or break apart
d. Fault – a break or crack along which rocks move (level of
fault plane); hanging wall (rock above fault plane) and foot
wall (rock below fault plane)
i. Normal fault - hanging wall goes down relative to
foot wall (vertical)
ii. Reverse fault – compression causes hanging wall
to move up relative to foot wall
iii. Thrust fault – compression causes hanging wall to
slide over the foot wall
iv. Lateral Strike Slip fault – one moves to left/right in
relation to another (horizontal)

e. Plate tectonics: The Earth's surface is made up of a series of large plates (like pieces of a jigsaw
puzzle) which are in constant motion travelling at a few cms per year, spreading from the centre
and sinking at the edges, termed as convection currents sourced from radioactive decay of Earth.

i. Continental Drift – theory that continents can drift from one another
Alfred Wegener said that “From supercontinent named Pangea continents moved, the
leading edge of the continent would encounter resistance and thus compress and fold
upwards forming mountains near the leading edges of the drifting continents”
ii. Types of Plate Boundaries
1. Transform boundaries occur where two lithospheric plates slide or grind past
each other along transform faults; plates are neither created nor destroyed. (ex.
The San Andreas Fault in California)
2. Divergent boundaries occur where two plates slide apart from each other.
(rifting)
a. Ocean-to-ocean rifting: divergent boundaries form by seafloor
spreading, allowing for the formation of new ocean basin. (ex. MidAtlantic Ridge, East Pacific Rise)

b. Continent-to-continent rifting, divergent boundaries may cause new
ocean basin to form as the continent spreads, the central rift collapses,
and ocean fills the basin. (ex. Africa's East African Rift, Red Sea)
3. Convergent boundaries occur where two plates slide toward each other to form
either a subduction zone (one plate moving underneath the other) or a
continental collision.
a. Continent-to-continent subduction, the dense oceanic lithosphere
plunges beneath the less dense continent. Earthquakes then trace the
path of the downward-moving plate as it descends into asthenosphere,
a trench forms, and as the subducted plate partially melts, magma rises
to form continental volcanoes. (ex. Western South America, and
Cascade Mountains in Western United States)
b. Ocean-to-ocean subduction, older, cooler, denser crust slips beneath
less dense crust. This causes earthquakes and a deep trench to form in
an arc shape. The upper mantle of the subducted plate then heats and
magma rises to form curving chains of volcanic islands. (ex. the Andes
mountain range in South America, Aleutian islands, Mariana islands,
and the Japanese island arc)
4. Plate boundary zones occur where the effects of the interactions are unclear,
and the boundaries, usually occurring along a broad belt, are not well defined
and may show various types of movements in different episodes.
3. Half-life - is the amount of time required for a quantity to fall to half its value as measured at the beginning
of the time period. While the term "half-life" can be used to describe any quantity which follows an
exponential decay
4. Geological Periods

III. Scientific Method and Experiments
1. Steps of Scientific Method - process by which scientists, collectively and over time, endeavor to construct
an accurate representation of the world.
a. Observation and description of a phenomenon
b. Formulation of an hypothesis to explain the phenomena
c. Use of the hypothesis to predict the existence of other phenomena, or to predict quantitatively the
results of new observations.
d. Performance of experimental tests by several independent experimenters and properly designed
experiments.
i. Confirmation of hypothesis
ii. Ruling out of hypothesis
2. Sources of Experimental Error
a. Random error - error intrinsic to instruments of measurement which has equal probability of
producing a measurement higher or lower numerically than the "true" value.
b. Non-random or systematic error - error due to factors which bias the result in one direction.
***No experiment can be perfectly precise. At the same time, there are standard ways of estimating and
reducing errors. It is important to determine the accuracy of a particular measurement and, when stating
quantitative results, to quote the measurement error.
3. Hypothesis, Model, Theories, Laws
a. Hypothesis is a limited statement regarding cause and effect in specific situations; it also refers to
our state of knowledge before experimental work has been performed and perhaps even before new
phenomena have been predicted.
b. Models are for situations when it is known that the hypothesis has at least limited validity. (ex. Bohr
model)
c. Scientific theory or law represents a hypothesis, or a group of related hypotheses, which has been
confirmed through repeated experimental tests.
4. Variables in an Experiment
a. Independent variable: factor that you purposely change in an experiment.
b. Dependent variable: factor that you are measuring in order to determine whether or not it is affected
by a change in the independent variable.
c. Controlled variable: factors which are controlled or held constant throughout an investigation. They
are kept unchanging so that they won't influence the outcome of the
experiment.
B. Review of Biology
I. Organic Macromolecules
Creation of larger molecules = dehydration (removal of H2O)
Breakdown of larger molecules = hydrolysis
1. Proteins C, H, O, N
Monomer: Amino Acid (20)
α helix, β pleated sheets
Polypeptide chains
Broken down by proteinases

Found in enzymes, blood cells, receptors and muscle tissue
created by RNA during DNA Transcription and Translation
Biuret Test (+) blue  violet (clustering of amide ions)







The protein consists of two polypeptide chains, a long one on the left of 346 amino acids — it is
called the heavy chain — and a short one on the right of 99 amino acids.
The heavy chain has 5 main domains, anchored in the plasma membrane of the cell, the heavy
chain is called an integral membrane protein.
o three extracellular domains, designated here as N (includes the N-terminal), C1, and C2
o transmembrane domain where the polypeptide chain passes through the plasma
membrane of the cell
o a cytoplasmic domain (with the C terminal) within the cytoplasm of the cell.
To the right is the protein molecule called beta-2 microglobulin. It is not attached by noncovalent
interactions like hydrogen bonds, and thus called peripheral membrane protein.
The dark bars represent disulfide (S—S) bridges linking portions of each external domain (except
the N domain).

2. Carbohydrates C, H, O [1:2:1]
Monomer: monosaccharide/simple sugar
Benedict’s Test (+): bluebrown red
Cu2+  Cu+ (Cu2O)
C6H12O6 = structural isomers
Glucose: blood sugar
Galactose: milk sugar
Fructose: fruit sugar
Disaccharide (2 units)
C12H22O11 = structural isomers
Sucrose: common table sugar = glucose + fructose
Lactose: major sugar in milk = glucose + galactose
Maltose: product of starch digestion = glucose +
glucose

Oligosaccharide (3-10 units)
Polysaccharide/complex sugar
Starch Test (+): black-blue after addition of iodine


Starch - insoluble in water, plant storage form.
o Amylose: linear chains of several hundred glucose units linked by a 1-4 glycosidic bond.
o Amylopectin: highly branched several thousand glucose units. A short side chain is linked
to C6 (the carbon above the ring)
o The hydrolysis of starch is done by amylases.



Cellulose - single most abundant organic molecule in the biosphere, major structural material of
plants. Difference from starch:
o orientation of the glycosidic bonds: glucose rings arranged in a flip-flop manner  long,
straight, rigid molecule.
o no side chains in cellulose  lie close together
o many -OH groups  many hydrogen bonds to form



Glycogen – animal storage form.
o Structure is similar to amylopectin, although the branches tend to be shorter and more
frequent.
o Stored mostly in liver and muscles
o Glycogen is broken back down into glucose when energy is needed via glycogenolysis
 Phosphate groups break the 1 -> 4 linkages
 Then remove phosphate group, so that glucose can leave the cell

3. Lipids C,H,O, [3:1]
3 F.A. chains + glycerol bound by ester linkage = triglyceride
Sudan IV Test (+) = dark red  reddish orange
Hydrophobic
Saturated - all single bonds; maximum possible amount of
hydrogens, solid at room temperature
Mono/Polyunsaturated – one/multiple double/triple bond; not
bonded to maximum hydrogens, liquid at room temperature
Cis – carbon chains on same side “good oils”
Trans – carbon chains on opposite side “trans fats = bad oils”
Lipoproteins are clusters of proteins and lipids all tangled up
together. These act as a means of carrying lipids, including
cholesterol, around in our blood.
LDL or low density lipoprotein “bad guy,” associated with
deposition of cholesterol
HDL or high density lipoprotein “good guy,” associated with
carrying “cholesterol” out of the blood



Triglycerides



Phospholipids
o Glycerol + two fatty acids + phosphate group with some other
molecule attached to its other end.
o Hydrocarbon tails of the fatty acids are still hydrophobic, but
the phosphate group end of the molecule is hydrophilic
because of the oxygens with all of their pairs of unshared
electrons.
o Soluble in water and oil - “emulsifying agent”
 Ex. lecithin (found in eggs, used to make
mayonnaise), cell membranes



Steroids
o consist of two six-membered rings side-by-side and sharing one side in
common, a third six-membered ring off the top corner of the right ring,
and a five-membered ring attached to the right side of that. The central
core of this molecule, consisting of four fused rings
o Ex. estrogen (estradiol), progesterone, corticosteroids such as cortisol
(cortisone), aldosterone, testosterone, and Vitamin D

II. Cells, Tissues
1. Cell components and functions

2. Prokaryotic Cell


Capsule - Found in some bacterial cells, this
additional outer covering protects the cell when it is engulfed
by other organisms, assists in retaining moisture, and helps the
cell adhere to surfaces and nutrients.

Cell Wall - Outer covering of most cells that protects
the bacterial cell and gives it shape.

Cytoplasm - A gel-like substance composed mainly of
water that also contains enzymes, salts, cell components, and
various organic molecules.








Cell Membrane or Plasma Membrane - Surrounds the cell's cytoplasm and regulates the flow of substances
in and out of the cell.
Pili - Hair-like structures on the surface of the cell that attach to other bacterial cells. Shorter pili called
fimbriae help bacteria attach to surfaces.
Flagella - Long, whip-like protrusion that aids in cellular locomotion.
Ribosomes - Cell structures responsible for protein production.
Plasmids - Gene carrying, circular DNA structures that are not involved in reproduction.
Nucleoid Region - Area of the cytoplasm that contains the single bacterial DNA molecule.

3. Comparison between Eukaryotic and Prokaryotic Cells
Eukaryotic and Prokaryotic Cell Structures
Cell Structure

Prokaryotic Cell

Typical Animal Eukaryotic Cell

Cell Membrane

Yes

Yes

Cell Wall

Yes

No

Centrioles

No

Yes

Chromosomes

One long DNA strand

Many

Cilia or Flagella

Yes, simple

Yes, complex

Endoplasmic
Reticulum

No

Yes (some exceptions)

Golgi Complex

No

Yes

Lysosomes

No

Common

Mitochondria

No

Yes

Nucleus

No

Yes

Peroxisomes

No

Common

Ribosomes

Yes

Yes

4. Cell Division
a. Mitosis – division of somatic body cells resulting to two daughter cells

b. Meiosis – division of sex cells/gametes, resulting to 4 recombinant cells

Comparison between Mitosis and Meiosis

5. Cell and the Environment
Tonicity – measure of the effective osmotic pressure gradient (measured by the water potential of two
solutions) of two solutions separated by a selectively permeable membrane

Osmosis - spontaneous net movement of solvent molecules through a partially permeable membrane into a
region of higher solute concentration, in the direction that tends to equalize the solute concentrations on the
two sides.

Transport of Substances

III. Organ Systems
INTEGUMENTARY SYSTEM
Components: skin, hair, nails, sweat glands
Function: covers and protects body
Specific features:
-Protection against injury
-Sensory receptors in skin tell about the environment (touch, pressure, heat, cold, pain)
-Prevents drying out of cells
-Helps maintain body temperature (capillaries and sweat glands in skin)
-Sweat glands excrete water and some wastes
-Skin has Vitamin D precursor, which is converted to Vitamin D by sunlight
SKELETAL SYSTEM
Components: bones, cartilage, ligaments
Function: supports and protects body; muscles attached to bones; provides calcium storage; site of blood cell formation
Specific features:
-Supports body via bony framework
-Protects delicate vital organs (for their weight, bones are nearly as strong as steel)
-Bones are levers that transmit muscular forces; muscles are attached to bones by bands of connective tissue called
tendons. When muscles contract, they pull on bones. Bones are held together at the joints by bands of connective
tissue called ligaments.
-Marrow inside some bones produces blood cells (specifically inside flat bones: skull, ribs and breastbone)
-Bones serve as banks for storage and release of minerals like calcium and phosphorus
MUSCULAR SYSTEM
Components: skeletal muscle, cardiac muscle, smooth muscle
Function: moves parts of the skeleton, locomotion; pumps blood; aids movement of internal materials
Specific features:
-Muscle cells contract and become shorter and thicker; because muscle cells are long and narrow, they are called
fibers
-Skeletal muscles are attached to bones; they are voluntary muscles, which make our bodies move. They are striped
or striated in appearance.
-Cardiac muscle is found in the walls of the heart; it contacts involuntarily and is also striated.
-Smooth muscle is found in the walls of the digestive tract, uterus, blood vessels and other internal organs. The fibers
are not striated and they are involuntary.
NERVOUS SYSTEM
Components: nerves and sense organs, brain and spinal cord
Function: receives stimuli from external and internal environments, conducts impulses and integrates activities of other
systems
Specific features:
-Two divisions of the nervous system: central and peripheral
-Central nervous system consists of the brain and spinal cord
-Peripheral nervous system consists of the sense organs (eyes, ears, taste buds,
olfactory receptors, touch receptors) and the nerves which connect the spinal cord with the rest of the body. These
nerves are classified as either afferent (transmit information from the periphery to the spinal cord) or efferent (transmit
information from the spinal cord to the periphery).
-Peripheral nervous system is subdivided into two divisions: somatic division (consists

of receptors and nerves concerned with changes in the outside environment; the sense organs and afferent nerves)
and the autonomic division (regulates the internal environment; primarily the sympathetic and parasympathetic systems
of the efferent system of nerves).
ENDOCRINE SYSTEM
Components: pituitary gland, adrenal gland, thyroid gland, hypothalamus gland, pineal gland, kidney, pancreas,
ovaries, testes and other ductless glands (which are defined as tissues that secrete hormones that diffuse into the
blood vessels)
Function: regulates body chemistry and many body functions
Specific features:
-These glands are regulated by feedback control: information about hormone levels or their effect is fed back to the
gland to regulate the hormone's release
-Endocrine activity is controlled by the hypothalamus gland (which is located in the brain). This gland links the nervous
and endocrine systems. As a result of nervous stimuli, it secretes several releasing and inhibiting hormones that affect
the activity of the other glands.
CIRCULATORY SYSTEM
Components: heart, blood vessels, blood; lymph and lymph structures
Function: transports materials from one part of the body to another; defends body against disease
Specific features:
-Consists of two subsystems: the cardiovascular system (includes the heart which pumps the blood through the blood
vessels) and the lymphatic system (which helps to preserve fluid balance and protects the body against disease)
-Transports nutrients from the digestive system to all parts of the body
-Transports oxygen from the lungs to all the cells of the body
-Transports carbon dioxide and other metabolic wastes from the cells to the excretory organs
-Transports hormones from the endocrine glands to the target tissues
-Helps maintain normal body temperature
-Helps maintain fluid balance
-Protects the body against disease-causing organisms. The lymphocytes, which are a
type of white blood cell, are formed in the lymph tissue: lymph glands, spleen, thymus, tonsils and lymphoid tissue in
the gut. There are two types of lymphocytes: T lymphocytes (the mediators of cellular immunity; these cells destroy
the invader) and B lymphocytes (the antibody-producing cells; humoral immunity).
RESPIRATORY SYSTEM
Components: lungs and air passageways
Function: exchanges gases between the blood and the external environment
Specific features:
-Respiration includes breathing, gas exchange between lungs and blood, transport of gases through the body by the
blood, gas exchange between the blood and the cells and cellular respiration (the chemical reaction pathways by which
chemical energy is obtained from food).
DIGESTIVE SYSTEM
Components: mouth, esophagus, stomach, intestines, liver, pancreas
Function: ingests and digests foods, absorbs them into the blood
Specific features:
-Salivary glands, liver and pancreas are not part of the digestive system but secrete digestive juices into it
-The digestive system involves four major processes:
1. Ingestion-taking food into the mouth, chewing and swallowing
2. Digestion-breakdown of food into smaller pieces (catalyzed by enzymes)
3. Absorption-transfer of digested food through the wall of the intestine and into
the circulatory system

4. Elimination-removal of undigested and unabsorbed food from the body (in feces)
URINARY SYSTEM
Components: kidney, bladder and associated ducts
Function: excretes metabolic wastes; removes substances present in excess from the blood
Specific features:
-Urine is made by the kidneys; it's transported from the kidneys to the bladder by the ureters; the bladder stores the
urine then the urine leaves the bladder and exits the body via the urethra.
-95% of urine is water. Also present is urea, which is produced in the liver (urea is the excretion form of nitrogen
waste).
REPRODUCTIVE SYSTEM
Components: testes, ovaries and associated structures
Function: reproduction, which provides for continuation of the species

IV. Energy
1. Photosynthesis: Photosynthesis is the process of converting light energy to chemical energy and storing it
in the bonds of sugar. This process occurs in plants and some algae (Kingdom Protista). Plants need only
light energy, CO2, and H2O to make sugar. The process of photosynthesis takes place in the chloroplasts,
specifically using chlorophyll, the green pigment involved in photosynthesis.
1. Chloroplast: outer and inner membranes, intermembrane space, stroma, and thylakoids stacked in
grana. The chlorophyll is built into the membranes of the thylakoids.
2. 6CO2 + 6H2O (+ light energy) → C6H12O6 + 6O2.
a. Light Reaction
 happens in the thylakoid membrane, converts light energy to chemical energy.
 chlorophyll and several other pigments such as beta-carotene are organized in
clusters in the thylakoid membrane. Each of these differently-colored pigments
can absorb a different color of light and pass its energy to the central chlorphyll
molecule to do photosynthesis.
 central part of the chemical structure of a chlorophyll molecule is a porphyrin
ring, which consists of several fused rings of carbon and nitrogen with a
magnesium ion in the center.

b. Dark Reaction
 the energy harvested via the light reaction is stored
by forming ATP (adenosine triphosphate)
 takes place in the stroma within the chloroplast,
and converts CO2 to sugar.
 needs the products of the light reaction (ATP and
NADPH).
 the first product of photosynthesis is a threecarbon compound glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate.
Almost immediately, two of these join to form a
glucose molecule.
 Rubisco - Ribulose-1,5-bisphosphate
carboxylase/oxygenase
o atmospheric carbon dioxide is converted
by plants to energy-rich glucose. By catalyzes the carboxylation of ribulose-1,5bisphosphate (RuBP).
o most abundant protein on Earth

2. Cell Respiration: a catabolic pathway for the production of adenosine triphosphate (ATP)
1. Glycolysis: "splitting sugars." Glucose, a 6C sugar, is split into two molecules of a 3C sugar. In the
process, two molecules of ATP, two molecules of pyruvic acid and two NADH are produced.
Glycolysis can occur with or without oxygen.
 (+) oxygen, glycolysis is the first stage of cellular respiration.
 (-) oxygen, glycolysis allows cells to make small amounts of ATP via fermentation.

2. Citric Acid Cycle: aka Krebs Cycle begins after the two molecules of 3C sugar produced in
glycolysis are converted to acetyl CoA. Through a series of intermediate steps, several compounds
capable of storing "high energy" electrons are produced along with two ATP molecules. These
compounds, known as nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD) and flavin adenine dinucleotide
(FAD), are reduced in the process. The Citric Acid Cycle occurs only when oxygen is present but it
doesn't use oxygen directly.

3. Electron Transport: requires oxygen directly. The electron transport chain is a series of electron
carriers in the membrane of the mitochondria in eukaryotic cells. Through a series of reactions, the
"high energy" electrons are passed to oxygen. In the process, a electric gradient is formed, and ATP
is produced.

4. Maximum ATP Yields: In summary, prokaryotic cells can yield a maximum of 38 ATP molecules
while eukaryotic cells can yield a maximum of 36 ATP. In eukaryotic cells, the NADH molecules
produced in glycolysis pass through the mitochondrial membrane, which needs two ATPs.
V. Ecology and Environment\
ENVIRONMENTAL SCIENCE
Acid Rain - air pollution, sulfuric acid.

Global Warming - greenhouse gases, greenhouse effect.

Ozone Layer - CFC chlorofluorocarbons, O3, ultraviolet radiation

Loss of Biodiversity - deforestation, extinction of species.
Toxic Magnification - accumulation of toxins in higher trophic levels.
Resource Depletion - topsoil erosion, ground water pollution and depletion, non-renewable resources, rate of
renewable resources.
Human Population Growth - growth rate, ecological footprint.
POPULATION ECOLOGY
Populations - size, density, dispersion.
Population Growth Model - exponential growth, logistic growth, carrying capacity, density-dependent factors, densityindependent factors, r-strategists, K-strategists.

Hardy-Weinberg principle - allele frequencies in populations

BIOLOGICAL COMMUNITY - the different species living in a habitat.
Ecosystem Biodiversity - biotic factors and abiotic factors
Competition - niche, limited resources.
Symbiosis - parasitism, mutualism, commensalism, predator and prey
Biomes of the World (defined as contiguous areas with similar climatic conditions on the Earth, such as communities
of plants, animals, and soil organisms, and are often referred to as ecosystems)

tundra biome, desert biome, marine biome, grassland biome, taiga biome, temperate grassland biomes,
temperate deciduous forest biome, tropical rain forest biome, savanna biome, polar ice biome.
What is an Ecosystem - biological community and physical environmental factors.
Forest Ecosystems - tropical rainforest ecosystems, temperate rainforest, tropical dry forests, deciduous forests,
coniferous forests.

Aquatic Ecosystems - freshwater, ocean, wetland, marine, pond

Other Ecosystems - desert, tundra, grassland, soil
Succession - pioneer species, climax community, boundaries

ENERGY FLOW
Food Chain - feed from lower trophic level.
Trophic Levels - producers, consumers, herbivores, carnivores, omnivores, detritivores, decomposers.
Autotrophs (producers) vs. Heterotrophs (consumers)
Poikilotherms (ectotherms) vs. Homeotherms (endotherms)

Food Web - multiple interlocking food chains.

Energy Pyramid - energy transfer, energy efficiency, biomass.

BIOGEOCHEMICAL CYCLES
Water Cycle - ground water, percolation, run-off, transpiration, precipitation, evaporation, water vapor

Carbon Cycle - atmospheric CO2, cellular respiration, photosynthesis, combustion, death and decomposition, fossil
fuels, erosion from marine deposits

Nitrogen Cycle - nitrogen fixation, nitrogen fixing bacteria, assimilation, ammonification, nitrification, nitrifying
bacteria, denitrification, denitrifying bacteria, atmospheric N2, ammonia, nitrates, nitrites.

Phosphorous Cycle

Sulfur Cycle

VI. Taxonomy – binomial nomenclature
Kingdom, Phylum, Class, Order, Family, Genus, and Species.

1. Archaebacteria
Organisms: Methanogens, Halophiles, Thermophiles, Psychrophiles
Cell Type: Prokaryotic
Metabolism: Depending on species - oxygen, hydrogen, carbon dioxide, sulfur, sulfide may be needed for
metabolism.
Nutrition Acquisition: Depending on species - nutrition intake may by absorption, non-photosynthetic
photophosphorylation, or chemosynthesis.
Reproduction: Asexual reproduction by binary fission, budding, or fragmentation.
2. Eubacteria
Organisms: Bacteria, Cyanobacteria(blue-green algae), Actinobacteria
Cell Type: Prokaryotic
Metabolism: Depending on species - oxygen may be toxic, tolerated, or needed for metabolism.
Nutrition Acquisition: Depending on species - nutrition intake may by absorption, photosynthesis, or chemosynthesis.
Reproduction: Asexual reproduction
3. Protista
Organisms: Amoebae, green algae, brown algae, diatoms, euglena, slime molds
Cell Type: Eukaryotic
Metabolism: Oxygen is needed for metabolism.
Nutrition Acquisition: Depending on species - nutrition intake may be by absorption, photosynthesis, or ingestion.
Reproduction: Mostly asexual reproduction. Meiosis occurs in some species.
4. Fungi
Organisms: Mushrooms, yeast, molds
Cell Type: Eukaryotic
Metabolism: Oxygen is needed for metabolism.
Nutrition Acquisition: Absorption
Reproduction: Asexual or sexual reproduction occur.
5. Plantae
Organisms: Mosses, angiosperms (flowering plants), gymnosperms, liverworts, ferns
Cell Type: Eukaryotic
Metabolism: Oxygen is needed for metabolism.
Nutrition Acquisition: Photosynthesis
Reproduction: Some species reproduce asexually by mitosis. Other species exhibit sexual reproduction.

6. Animalia
Organisms: Mammals, amphibians, sponges, insects, worms
Cell Type: Eukaryotic
Metabolism: Oxygen is needed for metabolism.
Nutrition Acquisition: Ingestion
Reproduction: Sexual reproduction
VII. Molecular Biology and Genetics
1. Nucleic Acids: allow organisms to transfer genetic information from one generation to the next. Two types
of nucleic acids:
a. ribonucleic acid (RNA) CGAU
b. deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) CGAT
Nucleic acids: monomer – nucleotides composed of
 Nitrogenous Base – GA (purine) CTU (pyrimidine) complementary pairs
 Five-Carbon Sugar – ribose, deoxyribose
 Phosphate Group
Polynucleotides: nucleotides are joined to one another by covalent bonds between
the phosphate of one and the sugar of another, called phosphodiester linkages.
2. Central Dogma of Molecular Biology: When a cell divides, its DNA is copied and passed from one cell
generation to the next generation. DNA contains the "programmatic instructions" for cellular activities. When
organisms produce offspring, these instructions, in the form of DNA, are passed down. RNA is involved in
the synthesis of proteins. "Information" is typically passed from DNA to RNA to the resulting proteins.
a. DNA Transcription - transcribing DNA to RNA. The RNA transcript is used to produce proteins.
 RNA Polymerase Binds to DNA: DNA is transcribed by RNA polymerase. Specific
nucleotide sequences tell RNA polymerase where to begin and where to end. RNA
polymerase attaches to the DNA at the promoter region.
 Elongation: Certain proteins called transcription factors unwind the DNA strand and
allow RNA polymerase to transcribe only a single strand of DNA into a single stranded
RNA polymer called messenger RNA (mRNA). The strand that serves as the template is
called the antisense strand. The strand that is not transcribed is called the sense strand.
 Termination: RNA polymerase moves along the DNA until it reaches a terminator
sequence. At that point, RNA polymerase releases the mRNA polymer and detaches from
the DNA. mRNA must cross the nuclear membrane to reach the cytoplasm.

b. Translation - Once in the cytoplasm, ribosomes and another RNA molecule called transfer RNA
work together to translate mRNA into a protein. Proteins can be manufactured in large quantities
because a single DNA sequence can be transcribed by many RNA polymerase molecules at once.

3. Mendelian Genetics
MENDEL’S CONCLUSIONS BASED ON HIS EXPERIMENTS:
 The hereditary determinants are of a particulate nature. These determinants are called genes.
 Each parent has a gene pair in each cell for each trait studied. The F1 from a cross of two pure
lines contains one allele for the dominant phenotype and one for the recessive phenotype. These
two alleles comprise the gene pair.
 One member of the gene pair segregates into a gamete, thus each gamete only carries one
member of the gene pair.
 Gametes unite at random and irrespective of the other gene pairs involved.
DEFINITIONS
 Allele - one alternative form of a given allelic pair; tall and dwarf are the alleles for the height of a
pea plant; more than two alleles can exist for any specific gene, but only two of them will be found
within any individual
 Allelic pair - the combination of two alleles which comprise the gene pair
 Homozygote - an individual which contains only one allele at the allelic pair; for example DD is
homozygous dominant and dd is homozygous recessive; pure lines are homozygous for the gene
of interest
 Heterozygote - an individual which contains one of each member of the gene pair; for example the
Dd heterozygote
 Genotype - the specific allelic combination for a certain gene or set of genes
 Dominance - the ability of one allele to express its phenotype at the expense of an alternate allele;
the major form of interaction between alleles; generally the dominant allele will make a gene
product that the recessive can not; therefore the dominant allele will express itself whenever it is
present
 Pure Line - a population that breeds true for a particular trait [this was an important innovation
because any non-pure (segregating) generation would and did confuse the results of genetic
experiments]
 Phenotype - literally means "the form that is shown"; it is the outward, physical appearance of a
particular trait




Dominant - the allele that expresses itself at the expense of an alternate allele; the phenotype that
is expressed in the F1 generation from the cross of two pure lines
Recessive - an allele whose expression is suppressed in the presence of a dominant allele; the
phenotype that disappears in the F1 generation from the cross of two pure lines and reappears in
the F2 generation

MENDELIAN LAWS:
Mendel's First Law - the law of segregation; during gamete formation each member of the allelic
pair separates from the other member to form the genetic constitution of the gamete.
Mendel's Second Law - the law of independent assortment; during gamete formation the
segregation of the alleles of one allelic pair is independent of the segregation of the alleles of
another allelic pair.
References:
EARTH SCIENCE
http://www.ehow.com/info_10002941_formation-igneous-metamorphic-sedimentary-rocks.html
http://geology.about.com/od/minerals/f/mostcommonmin.htm
http://jersey.uoregon.edu/~mstrick/AskGeoMan/geoQuerry59.html
http://teacher.nsrl.rochester.edu/phy_labs/appendixe/appendixe.html
http://www.enchantedlearning.com/subjects/dinosaurs/glossary/Period.shtml
http://www.slideshare.net/coachmckay/movement-of-the-earths-crust
http://www.moorlandschool.co.uk/earth/tectonic.htm
http://space.about.com/cs/astronomy101/a/astro101a.htm
BIOLOGY
http://biology.unm.edu/ccouncil/Biology_124/Summaries/Cell.html
http://biology.unm.edu/ccouncil/Biology_124/Summaries/Macromol.html
http://users.rcn.com/jkimball.ma.ultranet/BiologyPages/C/Carbohydrates.html
http://biology.clc.uc.edu/courses/bio104/lipids.htm
http://users.rcn.com/jkimball.ma.ultranet/BiologyPages/P/Proteins.html
http://www.usfca.edu/fac-staff/dever/biol4outline_DNAcarbs.pdf
http://biology.about.com/od/cellularprocesses/a/cellrespiration.htm
http://biology.about.com/od/cellanatomy/a/eukaryprokarycells.htm
http://biology.clc.uc.edu/courses/bio104/photosyn.htm
http://biology.about.com/od/evolution/a/aa092304a.htm
http://www.ndsu.edu/pubweb/~mcclean/plsc431/mendel/mendel1.htm
http://www.rims.edu.in/HealthCareCDACKolgksaha/Human%20Body%20Organ%20System.jpg
http://biology.about.com/od/evolution/a/aa091004a.htm
http://www.scienceprofonline.com/chemistry/diffusion-osmosis-tonicity-effect-osmotic-pressure-on-cells.html

