Ultimate UPCAT Prep

 FilipiKnow
179 Duhat, Bocaue, Bulacan
Phone +639778237294

Table of Contents

HOW TO ANSWER MULTIPLE CHOICE QUESTIONS LIKE A
PRO ................................................................................................ 2
LANGUAGE PROFICIENCY ......................................................... 13
SCIENCE ...................................................................................... 56
MATHEMATICS ............................................................................ 88
READING COMPREHENSION ................................................... 113
LANGUAGE ANSWER KEY ....................................................... 183
SCIENCE ANSWER KEY ........................................................... 188
MATHEMATICS ANSWER KEY ................................................. 191
READING ANSWER KEY ........................................................... 229

1

1
How to Answer Multiple Choice
Questions Like A Pro
Between a multiple choice test and an essay exam, most of us
would rather choose the former.
Multiple choice tests trick our brains that they're easier to answer.
All we have to do is to distinguish the correct answer from the
distracters.
However, answering multiple choice exams are not as easy or
straightforward as we like them to be, especially if we're dealing
with crucial exams like the UPCAT.
The following tips are a perfect supplement to your hard-earned
stocked knowledge and can maximize your success in answering
any multiple-choice exam.

Be wary of tricks and traps.
Sometimes they're easy to identify but the more subtle ones are
what you should watch out for. Don't overanalyze but never trust
questions that are too easy either.
2

Remember, the goal of test makers is to gauge your analytical skills
in all subtests. When answering language proficiency exams, for
instance, the following traps may lead you to the path of failure if
you're not careful:

a. Violation of the rule of "parallel structures."
Example: "Play, eat, and sleeping--these are what my pet dog
usually does all day."
Explanation: Parallel structures are used to ensure clarity of
statements. According to this principle, words and phrases in a
sentence should be consistent in terms of structure and tense.
The example sentence above violates the rule of parallel structures.
The first two verbs--play and eat--are in present tense, while the
last one--sleeping--is a verb that acts as a noun, otherwise known
as a gerund.
To correct the sentence, the gerund should be replaced with a verb
form consistent with the other two words, hence:
"Play, eat, and sleep--these are what my pet dog usually does all
day."

b. Insertion of distracting phrase or clause that clouds subjectverb agreement.
Example: "Many politicians, in their desire to win an election, makes
grandiose promises to voters."
Explanation: Always focus on two things: the subject and the verb.
Everything else is secondary. In the above example, the subject is
"politicians" which is in plural form so the verb must also be plural.
3

Hence, the correct answer should be "make" instead of "makes."

c. Use of inverted sentence structure.
Example: "In the middle of the forest stands the giant trees
considered oldest in the region."
Explanation: Inverted sentences have verbs that come before the
subjects instead of the other way around. It's easy to assume
there's nothing wrong with this sentence if you don't look closely.
In the sentence above, for example, the verb "stands" describe the
subject "trees," not the "forest." Therefore, it should be rewritten as:
"In the middle of the forest stand the giant trees considered oldest
in the region."

d. Misplaced modifiers.
Example: "Eagerly awaiting her birthday, Mary's presents were all
picked up and admired by Mary many times throughout the course
of the day."
Explanation: Modifiers are words that add details or change the
meaning of another word. To avoid confusion, the modifiers should
be placed close to the subject being described.
Misplaced modifiers can be really confusing since you're dealing
with several words at the same time. The example above makes it
seem as though Mary's presents, not Mary herself, are "eagerly
awaiting her birthday."

4

Using common sense, we know that Mary's presents have no way
of expressing the emotion of eagerness. By rearranging the words,
we can come up with a sentence that makes more sense:
Eagerly awaiting her birthday, Mary picked up and admired her
presents many times throughout the day.

Eliminate distracters.
Most multiple choice questions provide you with four possible
answers to choose from--A, B, C, or D.
Use the process of elimination to whittle down the choices to only
two. If you remove the distracters from the equation, it will be easier
for you to get to the right answer since you'll only be choosing
between two options.
Dealing with only two choices also means you have 50% probability
of getting it right.

Watch out for qualifiers.
A qualifier is a word that enhances or limits the meaning of another
word.
Qualifiers can either be absolute (e.g., all, always, absolutely,
never, certainly, best, every, only, worst, invariably, without
exception) or conditional (e.g., usually, probably, possibly, seldom,
might, much, most, often, generally, frequently).
When you see a qualifier in one of the choices, it can either make
the option correct or incorrect.
5

For example, the sentences below seem identical:
"It often rains in Batanes."
"It always rains in Batanes."
A closer look reveals that both sentences may look similar but they
differ in meanings due to the type of qualifier used. Whereas the
first sentence is correct, the second one is false because of the use
of the word "always."
In multiple choice exams, options that use absolute qualifiers
are mostly wrong while those with conditional qualifiers like
"often," "seldom," and "probably" tend to be the correct
answers.

Draw diagrams and pictures to solve tricky Math
problems.
Although some math problems can easily be solved with mental
calculations, there are complex questions that warrant more
visualization.
By converting word problems into diagrams or pictures, you can
make them less intimidating and easier to solve.
Example: "The town of Marabut is located along Marikina Highway.
The town of Caranglan is west of Marabut. Sarangani is east of
Caranglan, but west of Marabut. Daraga is east of Rajamon, but
west of Sarangani and Caranglan. Which town is the farthest
west?"
To solve this problem, draw a line and put the first two places in
their respective locations as described in the statement: "The town
of Caranglan is west of Marabut."
6

Next, place the other towns in their correct order as indicated in the
word problem.

Based on the diagram we've created, we can easily see that the
town farthest west is Rajamon.
7

Although you can also visualize the diagram in your mind, actually
drawing it on your scratch paper makes you less likely to commit
mistakes.

Keep an eye out on negatives.
Negative words like none, never, not, no, and those with prefixes
like un-, il-, or im- can change the meaning of a sentence.
If you don't read carefully, you may misinterpret a statement
containing negative words as false when it's actually true.
Consider the two sentences below:
"It is logical to assume that Thomas Edison’s fame was due to his
many
practical inventions."
"It is illogical to assume that Thomas Edison’s fame was not due
to his
many practical inventions."
The first statement, which contains no negatives, is true. The
second sentence, on the other hand, has double negatives. When
two negative words are present, the statement is also true since the
negatives negate each other.
Both statements above are true but the second one is relatively
harder to figure out due to the presence of the negative words.
When dealing with sentences like this in multiple-choice
exams, identify the negatives first and then understand the
meaning of the statement without the negative words. This
way, you can find out whether the sentence is true or false without
being influenced by the negatives.
8

Look for grammatical clues.
Multiple choice questions can be asked in different ways but
regardless of the format, they all follow basic grammar rules.
In some language proficiency exams, the answer can be the one
that makes the most sense grammatically. For example, in a
question that ends with the indefinite article "an," the answer is
most likely the one that starts with a vowel.
The following question is another good example:
The people of Iceland
a. A country located just outside the Arctic Circle
b. Are the world’s most avid readers
c. Claim to be descendants of the Aztecs
d. The capital, Reykjavik, where arms talks have been held
Based on grammar rules, we can eliminate choices (a) and (d). You
can now choose between options (b) and (c) since they're the only
ones that don't interrupt the flow of the sentence and follow the
basic subject-verb agreement.
Grammatical clues can also be used to answer questions that
test your ability to organize phrases or sentences.
Example:
a. Secondly, they had no leader.
b. Firstly, the workers were not united.
c. Finally, they did not have the support of their families.
d. Thirdly, they had no funds to tide them over.
e. From the beginning, it looked like the worker's strike was
doomed to fail.
Answer choices:
9

1. abdec
2. cbead
3. deabc
4. ebadc
Relying on the keywords at the start of each sentence, we can
organize them into a sequence that makes sense: "From the
beginning," followed by "Firstly," "Secondly," and so forth. The
correct sequence, therefore, is "ebadc."

Ignore conventional advice.
You've probably been told that when in doubt, always choose "c."
However, the probability of getting the question right if you choose
this letter is similar to your chances of winning the lottery.
Don't look for patterns in places that have none, especially in
multiple-choice exams where answers are arranged in random
order.
Therefore, if you notice that you've chosen the same letter for three
consecutive questions, don't be alarmed. The pattern must be
coincidental so never let it interrupt you from answering the rest of
the exam.

Be systematic when faced with confusing
questions/choices.
The goal of the test maker is not to make your life easier. But no
matter how long and confusing the questions and their
corresponding choices may be, you can arrive at the right answer
by taking it one step at a time.
10

Example:
Which of the following facilitates the healing process?
Resting the injured part of the body.
Protection of the wound from further Injury.
Adequate nutrition.
Emotional support from friends and family.
Depriving the patient of fluids.
Choices:
A, b, d, e
A, b, c, d
A, c, d, e
All of the above
None of the above
At first glance, the question may look overwhelming. But by being
systematic, you can easily spot the answer without wasting so
much time.
First, eliminate the statement that is apparently false, in this case
(e) or "Depriving the patient with fluids." Next, go through the
choices and eliminate those that contain the false statement (e).
By doing this, you can trim down your choices and have a better
chance of picking the correct answer.

Additional tips.




Frequently check that your answers match the
corresponding questions, especially after you have skipped
some items.
Hide or cover the choices when reading the stem or the body
of the question. Figure out the answer if you can so you
11





won't be distracted by the other choices by the time you
uncover them.
Write down as many formulas as you can remember on the
scratch paper provided as soon as the exam starts. You can
either do this at the beginning (at the risk of losing a few
minutes) or after finishing the first part of the exam, provided
that it doesn't require computations like Language
Proficiency.
If you have remaining time left, go over your test paper for
the very last time to change answers for questions that
you've either misread or just finally realized the answers to.
Also, check for errors like stray pencil marks, questionanswer mismatch, and shading two answers for the same
question.

12

2
Language Proficiency
Directions: This subtest will measure your fluency in English and
Filipino. Read the sentence/question/passage first before selecting
the letter that corresponds to your answer.
1. May I please request that each of the two groups take an
position in the issue now.
A. alternating
B. alternative
C. alternate
D. all of the above
2.
mountains aplenty in the Philippines.
A. There is
B. There are
C. There were
D. There was

3. The student badly needs her teacher's
A. advice
B. advise
C. advising
D. advisory

13

4. Choose the correct and effective sentence from the set of
sentences.
A. She only walked fifteen miles when her legs gave out.
B. She had only walked for about fifteen miles when her legs gave
out.
C. She has walked only fifteen miles when her legs gave out.
D. She had walked only fifteen miles when her legs gave out.

5. A thousand pesos __________ not enough compensation and
you _________ it.
A. are – knows
B. are – know
C. is – know
D. is – knows
6. If we __________ harder we would have passed the UPCAT.
A. study
B. had studied
C. studied
D. have studied
7. Amicable means the same as –
A. friendly
B. anxious
C. jealous
D. patient
8.
are you deserting me
our supplies.
A. neither—nor
B. not only—but
C. both—and
D. either—or
14

you are also taking

9. Lolita is going to Switzerland ___________ May next year.
Particularly, she would be leaving ___________ eight o’clock a.m
_________ New Year’s Day.
A. in – on – on
B. at – on – at
C. in – at – in
D. in – at – on

10. Choose the correct and effective sentence from the set of
sentences.
A. Father jogs exuberantly to the park every morning before
breakfast to exercise his heart.
B. Father exuberantly jogs every morning to the park to exercise his
heart before breakfast.
C. Father, to exercise his heart, jogs exuberantly every morning
before breakfast to the park.
D. Father jogs exuberantly every morning before breakfast to the
park to exercise his heart.
11. She ______________ finished the project before tomorrow.
A. None of the above
B. would have
C. will have
D. should have
Questions 12 – 14: Read the group of words provided. There may
be a mistake in the sentence structure. If you find a mistake,
choose the answer that is written most clearly and correctly. If there
is no mistake, choose Correct as is.
12. Veronica left the room, turned right, and, without any hesitation,
walked outside.
15

A. Leaving the room, turning right, Veronica walking outside without
any hesitation.
B. Veronica left the room and she turned right and walked outside
without any hesitation.
C. Veronica left the room turned right and walked outside without
any hesitation.
D. Correct as is
13. There are extra chairs in that room that are not needed or
necessary.
A. There are extra chairs in that room.
B. There are extra and unnecessary chairs in that room.
C. The extra chairs in that room are not needed or necessary.
D. Correct as is
14. Some tortoises living up to 100 years are among the world’s
oldest animals.
A. The world’s oldest animals, some living up to 100 years are
some tortoises.
B. Some tortoises, among the world’s oldest animals, are living up
to 100 years.
C. Living up to 100 years, some tortoises are among the world’s
oldest animals.
D. Correct as is
For question numbers 15 – 21: Determine which of the following
synonyms on the given choices best corresponds to how the
underlined word/s were used on each sentence.
15. Leo made a disappointed, misunderstood face from the many
creases at his disposal.
A. authority
B. distribution
C. garbage unit
D. regulation

16

16. Joana's reply to his query was sure and crisp, that it didn't took
too long before she was able to prod him away.
A. brittle
B. lively
C. concise
D. fragile
17. The professor took an immaculate handkerchief out of his
pocket, and began to polish the lenses of his glasses.
A. pure
B. spotless
C. error-free
D. flawless
18. Much of his writing is slack that is why readers get bored at his
works.
A. lacks action
B. lacks completeness/perfection
C. lacks firmness
D. lacks diligence
19. Members shall be adequately braced to resist lateral and
torsional displacement.
A. connected together
B. supported with braces
C. reinforced
D. get ready for an attack
20. Pauline's words had made all sorts of frightened echoes in our
minds.
A. a close imitation
B. an answering sympathetic effect
C. a soft recurrence of a statement
D. a reverberation of sound waves
17

21. The dead load consists of the weight of the structure
completed.
A. empty
B. inert
C. constant
D. lifeless
22. The cold air mass will move south from Canada.
In which sentence does the word mass mean the same thing as in
the sentence above?
A. The storm warning of a blizzard caused mass concern.
B. The oil mass spread quickly into the ocean.
C. There was a mass of people gathering to watch the parade.
D. The 100-member choir will mass in the auditorium on Saturday.
Questions 23 – 27: Choose the correct sequence of sentences
that will make the paragraph more organized and logical.
23.
(1) This mere mechanism of reading becomes altogether
automatic at an early period of life.
(2) You will often find yourself reading words or characters
automatically, while your mind is concerned with a totally
different subject.
(3) This can be performed irrespective of attention.
(4) In as much, neither can I call it reading when it is just to
extract the narrative portion of a text from the rest simply for
one’s personal amusement.
(5) To read the characters or the letters of the text does not
mean reading in the true sense of the word.
A. 5-2-1-3-4
B. 3-5-1-2-4
C. 2-1-3-4-5
18

D. 5-3-2-1-4

24.
(1) Most of this material which we call ash, stays behind after
the fire burns out.
(2) When we burn fuel such as wood, oil or coal, the fuel
combines with oxygen in the air to form gases that escape
into the atmosphere.
(3) Some of it, however, is carried aloft by the hot gases of the
fire and adds to the volume of smoke produced.
(4) In addition, most of the fuels contain a small amount of
various substances that do not burn.
(5) But most of the burning we do is far from perfect, so tiny
particles of unburned fuel escape up the chimney in the form
of smoke.
A. 2-5-3-4-1
B. 2-3-5-1-4
C. 2-3-5-4-1
D. 2-5-4-1-3

25.
(1) In the Philippines, the population boom has derailed efforts
to make the benefits of economic growth trickle down to the
grassroots. Thousands of new people are born on our
planet every day.
(2) With the population galloping toward the 100-million mark,
the Philippines will be among one of several developing
nations leading global population growth in the coming
years, according to the United Nations.
(3) With limited resources and economic growth failing to keep
pace with the population boom, this means more people
getting an ever-shrinking share of the pie.
19

(4) This has been a problem in previous administrations and
remains a problem of the Aquino government, despite
sustained economic growth since 2010.
(5) This is true both in the Philippines and around the planet,
whose resources cannot meet the demands especially of the
poorest segments of the 7.2 billion population.
A. 1-2-3-4-5
B. 4-2-3-1-5
C. 2-3-5-1-4
D. 5-3-2-1-4

26.
(1) Ang bawat polista ay kinakailangang magtrabaho ng
apatnapung araw sa bawat taon.
(2) Ang polo y servicios o sapilitang paggawa ay ang sapilitang
paglilingkod sa pamahalaang mga Pilipinong lalaki mula 16
hanggang 60 taong gulang.
(3) Noong 1884, ito ay ginagawa na lamang labinlimang araw.
(4) Ang mga manggagawa sa ilalim ng polo y servicios ay
tinatawag na polista.
(5) Upang makaligtas sa sapilitang paggawa, kinakailangang
magbayad ng falla na tanging mga mayayaman lamang ang
nakakabayad.
A. 2-4-1-3-5
B. 2-5-1-4-3
C. 2-3-1-5-4
D. 2-1-5-4-3

27.
(1) Ipinakikita ng panitikang eksistensyal ang kamulatan sa
kamalian at kahangalan ng uniberso.
20

(2) Madalas na paksa nito ang mga bagay at galaw na etikal na
titiyak sa kahulugan ng buong buhay ng isang indibidwal.
(3) Ang eksistensyalismo ay naniniwalang ang tao mismo ang
gumagawa at humuhubog ng kanyang kapalaran.
(4) Di nito tinatanggap na ang herediti at kapaligiran ang
tumitiyak sa motibasyon at ang pag-uugali ng tao.
(5) Ang kanyang kahihinatnan ay ayon sa kanyang pagpili ng
aksyon o ng pamamaraan ng pamumuhay.
A. 3-1-2-5-4
B. 3-5-4-1-2
C. 3-5-1-2-4
D. 3-2-1-4-5

28. His reassuring words mitigated our fears. Mitigated means –
A. reinforced
B. added to
C. caused
D. eased
29. By the time the operation ends, Billy _____ a total of 1,300
hours for his friend and _____ countless outdated magazines in the
emergency room waiting area.
A. will have waited…will have read
B. have waited…have read
C. waited…read
D. will have waited…read
30. Sarah wanted to see the concert she had been looking forward
to it for a long time. Choose the answer that is the best way to write
the underlined section of the sentence.
A. concert, she had been
B. concert; she had been
21

C. concert she has been
D. Correct as is
Questions 31 – 35: Ayusin ang mga sumusunod na salita upang
makabuo ng makabuluhang pangungusap.
31. nilalaman kuwento unawain ang ng
1
2
3 4 5
A. 3-4-5-2-1
B. 3-4-1-5-2
C. 3-5-1-2-3
D. 3-1-2-4-5

32. takdang sala ang may lahat parusa ng
1
2
3 4
5
6
7
A. 4-6-3-2-7-1-5
B. 4-1-6-3-5-7-2
C. 4-1-3-5-7-2-6
D. 4-2-3-5-7-6-1

33. isang ang buhay gulong ay
1
2
3
4
5
A. 2-5-3-4-1
B. 2-4-5-1-3
C. 2-5-3-1-4
D. 2-3-5-1-4

22

34.Celso ang hinihintay ano mo pa
1 2
3
4 5 6
A. 4-6-2-3-5-1
B. 4-5-6-2-3-1
C. 1-2-6-5-4-3
D. 1-4-5-3-2-6

35. kabataan ang ay mahalagang isang ng buhay
1
2 3
4
5
6
7
yugto
8
A. 2-5-1-6-7-8-3-4
B. 2-1-3-4-6-7-5-8
C. 2-1-3-5-4-8-6-7
D. 2-5-6-1-4-7-3-8

36. Neither of her Oscar awards, however, _____ been polished for
a long time.
A. have
B. is
C. has
D. have already
37. By the time the operation ends, Billy _____ a total of 1,300
hours for his friend and _____ countless outdated magazines in the
emergency room waiting area.
A. will have waited…will have read
B. have waited…have read
C. waited…read
D. will have waited…read
23

38. Patungo ______________ ang mga kandidato.
A. roon
B. doon
C. dito
D. rin
Questions 39 – 41: Read the paragraph and then answer the
questions that follow it.
“The Challenge”
It started when she was in elementary school. Sonia knew that she
wanted to be a champion synchronized swimmer. Today’s
competition would determine whether she would earn the
opportunity to go to the national contest. She performed the
required technical routines flawlessly and led the other swimmers
going into the free competition, the portion of the program that
counted most. This series of choreographed moves performed to
music required a couple of qualities. For one particularly difficult
element, Sonia had to remain upside down in the water for over half
a minute. She could tell by the audience’s thunderous applause
when she emerged from the pool that the performance had gone
well. Seconds later the judges confirmed it; Sonia was on her way
to the national contest.
39. This series of choreographed moves performed to music
required a couple of qualities?
Good writers describe the subject using details. How can the
underlined words be better written to include exact details?
A. some abilities that she had to develop
B. specific physical qualities
C. special moves
D. great strength and control

24

40. Which sentence would not belong in this paragraph?
A. Sonia had worked hard for many years to get to this point.
B. The routine had gone smoothly, and Sonia had done even better
than she had anticipated.
C. The cool water always felt wonderful to Sonia; she loved the
smell of chlorine.
D. Her dream, since childhood, was finally coming true.
41. Which of these would be the best topic sentence for this
paragraph?
A. A synchronized swimming team will be sent to the Olympics.
B. Sonia got a new swimsuit and cap for the competition.
C. Only a few extremely talented athletes win competitions.
D. For almost as long as she could remember, Sonia had wanted to
go to the Olympics.

Questions 42 – 56: Choose the alternative that best expresses the
idea in standard written English and is worded most consistently
with the tone of the passage. If you believe the original version is
best, then choose “NO CHANGE.” There will also be questions
about sections of the passage or about the passage as a whole.
Read the entire passage before answering any of the questions.
For some questions you may need to read beyond the underlined
section in order to determine the correct answer.
Building the Plaza de Toros
Thousands of tourists from all over the world gather in Seville,
Spain each year, two weeks after Easter Holy Week, to witness the
La Real Maestranza. La Real Maestranza is part of the Seville
Fair, and the Fair (42) originated back in 1847 when (43) it was
originally organized as a livestock fair. Of central importance to the
festival are the bullfights that took place (44) in the Plaza de Toros,
a circular ring on Baratillo Hill.
25

Construction on the stunning and beautiful (45) Plaza de Toros
first begun in 1749 but had not completed (46) for many years after.
The inner facade of the plaza (called the Palco del Príncipe or
Prince’s Box) was completed in 1765, and this box consists of
two parts; the (47) access gate through which the successful
bullfighters exited (48), and the theater box itself, which was
reserved for the exclusive use of not only the Spanish King and
Queen, but for (49) other members of the Royal Family. [50]
When monarch Carlos III prohibited bullfighting celebrations in
1786, work halted, and (51) only one-third of the plaza had been
completed (52) at the time. The construction of the ring was finally
completed in 1881, two thirds (53) were constructed in stone, the
rest in wood.
Choosing to redo them in brick, the stone grandstands were
replaced between 1914 and 1915 by architect Anival
Gonzalez. (54) All the rows were reconstructed with a smoother
slope. Ten to twelve rows of shaded seating were constructed as
well as fourteen rows in the sun and three rows of barrier. A row of
armchairs was built in the superior part of the shaded area,
and they (55) were placed in front of the theater boxes. [56]

42.
A. NO CHANGE
B. which originated
C. which did originate
D. and the Fair originated
43.
A. NO CHANGE
B. in which
C. after which
D. as

26

44.
A. NO CHANGE
B. had taken place
C. did take place
D. take place
45.
A. NO CHANGE
B. stunning yet beautiful
C. beautiful
D. stunning, however beautiful,
46.
A. NO CHANGE
B. was began in 1749 and was not completed
C. had begun in 1749 and had completed
D. began in 1749 but was not completed
47.
A. NO CHANGE
B. parts: the
C. parts, the
D. parts the
48.
A. NO CHANGE
B. did exit
C. are exiting
D. will exit
49.
A. NO CHANGE
B. not only the Spanish King and Queen, yet for
27

C. not only the Spanish King and Queen, but also for
D. not the Spanish King and Queen, but also for
50. Which of the sentences below does not belong anywhere in the
second paragraph?
A. The bullring is the oldest bullring constructed entirely of stone,
because most others were constructed with a combination of stone
and brick.
B. The stands were constructed in two levels of seating of 5 raised
rows per level and 136 Tuscan sandstone columns.
C. Seville’s fair is officially known as the April Fair, but in fact, it
hasn’t always been celebrated entirely in April and once, it even
had to be celebrated in May.
D. The Royal Box has a sloping roof covered in Arabic tiles.
51.
A. NO CHANGE
B. nevertheless
C. because
D. even though

52.
A. NO CHANGE
B. were completed
C. will complete
D. are completed
53.
A. NO CHANGE
B. 1881; two thirds
C. 1881, two thirds,
D. 1881—two thirds

28

54.
A. NO CHANGE
B. Choosing to redo them in brick, between 1914 and 1915
architect Anival Gonzalez replaced the stone grandstands.
C. Choosing to redo them in brick, architect Anival Gonzalez
replaced the stone grandstands between 1914 and 1915.
D. Choosing, between 1914 and 1915, to redo them in brick,
architect Anival Gonzalez replaced the stone grandstands.
55.
A. NO CHANGE
B. those
C. these chairs
D. it
56. Which of the following sentences best completes the passage?
A. Today spectators from around the world enjoy watching this
traditional Spanish sport in this world-class ring.
B. Between 1729 and 1733 Felipe V stayed in Seville and received
support from the Corporation in spite of being French and the first
Bourbon king of Spain.
C. More than 12,500 spectators can watch the fight between the
torero and the bull in this ring.
D. During the Seville Festival, men and women dress up in their
finery, ideally the traditional "traje corto" (short jacket, tight trousers
and boots) for men and the "faralaes" or "trajes de flamenca"
(flamenco style dress) for women.
Questions 57 – 64: Determine which of the following synonyms on
the given choices best corresponds to how the underlined word/s
were used on each sentence.
57. His stoic attitude earned him the title "man made of stone."
A. active
B. heavy
29

C. hard
D. indifferent
58. Samuel could not stand the gelid surroundings of the Alpine
Mountains.
A. very cold
B. very hot
C. humid
D. tepid
59. Do not worry about running short of rice because we had a
copious harvest last month.
A. weak
B. innumerable
C. depleting
D. abundant
60. Jojo is suffering from asphyxia. Noxious gases during fire have
suffocated him.
A. an unconscious state
B. a state of trance
C. a state of suppression
D. a state of affliction
61. Her hair was full and lightly curled.
A. chubby
B. filled
C. detailed
D. thick
62. The judge exculpated the accused for lack of evidence.
A. proved guilty
B. exonerated
30

C. banished
D. proved innocent

63. The politician was criticized for his preposterous remarks.
A. lengthy
B. witty
C. absurd
D. promising
64. Having lived with three old maids, Lucy projects a reticent
attitude.
A. meek
B. effusive
C. effulgent
D. offensive
65.________________ni Aling Nena ang mga pinamalengke dahil
sa takot.
A. Nabitawan
B. Nabitiwan
C. Nalaglag
D. Nabuhos

66. Ang pagbabasa ng mga iba’t ibang aklat sa Filipino ay isang
mabisang paraan upang lalong ______________ang kaalaman ng
mag-aaral tungkol sa wika.
A. malinang
B. maayos
C. masinop
D. masubukan
31

67._____________-Negros ang tagapag-alaga ni Norma.
A. Taga
B. Tiga
C. Mala
D. Parang

68. Nakipaghuntahan na naman _____ ang kasama mo _____ sa
kabilang ibayo.
A. raw, roon
B. raw, doon
C. daw, roon
D. daw, doon

69. Mrs. Santos is very happy because her pupil who used to be
very vociferous doesn’t talk much anymore.
A. lazy
B. active
C. talkative
D. sleepy

Questions 70 – 83: Select the word or pair of words that
appropriately completes the following relationship.
70. ode : poetry;
A. theme : essay
B. conflict : short story
C. fable : prose
32

D. tragedy : drama
71. each : somebody;
A. that : oh
B. gracefully : dance
C. sing : song
D. which : whom
72. peal : peel;
A. steal : still
B. fair : fare
C. buy : vie
D. great : greet
73. herd : cattle;
A. colony : termites
B. pack : peacocks
C. hive : wolves
D. covey : whales
74. epic : elegy;
A. allegro : plot
B. sonata : satire
C. radar : allegory
D. couplet : sonnet
75. golf : hole;
A. baseball : glove
B. archery - bull's eye
C. bowling : pin
D. tennis : racket

33

76. protein : meat;
A. energy : sugar
B. calories : water
C. vitamins : minerals
D. starch : potatoes
77. fern : plant;
A. shark : water
B. cat : lion
C. collie : boxer
D. dog : animal
78. try : tried;
A. came : come
B. fly : flew
C. go : gone
D. dead : died
79. lion : cub;
A. duck : drake
B. child : baby
C. horse : colt
D. goat : lamb
80. rabies : dogs;
A. malaria : mosquitoes
B. fever : ants
C. cough : worms
D. AIDS : rat
81. gloves : hand;
A. welder : steel
B. gun : combat
C. field : football
D. helmet : head
34

82. gun : holster;
A. sword : scabbard
B. sword : slay
C. sword : bayonet
D. sword : cadet
83. canvas : painting;
A. clay : pottery
B. clay : mold
C. clay : art
D. clay : statue
Directions: Choose the alternative that best expresses the idea in
standard written English and is worded most consistently with the
tone of the passage. If you believe the original version is best, then
choose “NO CHANGE.” There will also be questions about sections
of the passage or about the passage as a whole. Read the entire
passage before answering any of the questions. For some
questions you may need to read beyond the underlined section in
order to determine the correct answer.
For questions 84 – 98:
Passage 1

“Hair-raising Problems”
Why is it that we are so completely obsessive (84) with the hair on
our heads? Millions of dollars are spent each year on cutting hair,
lengthening hair, bleaching hair, straightening hair, curling hair,
highlighting hair, and even growing hair; whatever you can do to
hair, someone is willing to pay the money (85) to do it.
Natural redheads long for to be (86) brunettes and dishwater
blondes dream of shiny golden tresses. Both men and women
cringe at the sight of each gray hair, so (87) teenagers enjoy
35

weekly experiments with magenta dyes, spikes, and tangerine
streaks.
All of these thoughts cross my mind as I examine the result of (88)
my most recent hair adventure. As a mature woman watching the
gray hairs mixing in rapidly (89) with my natural brunette tones, I
decided over a year ago, to (90) approach my stylist with the idea
of highlights. Having seen many of my peers go this route, I figured
that highlighting was for to be (91) the answer to my reluctance to
look my age.
[1] The monthly highlighting went well: excepting (92) for those
times when my hair turned out a little too subdued, making me look
partially gray instead of brunette. [2] I suffered through it
remarkably well, saying to myself, “She’ll get it right the next time.”
[3] For the most part, (93) I’ve enjoyed my year of highlights, so
much so that I bravely approached Donna, my stylist, two months
ago and proclaimed that I was done with wimpy highlighting and
ready to go blonde.
[4] The result was not quite what I expected, but I resolved to live
with it! (94). [5] Donna was surprised at my suggestion, but quickly
began sharing my unbridled enthusiasm as she gathers (95) the
appropriate chemicals and concoctions that would soon transform
me.
Three months later, I find myself seesawing between tears and (96)
laughter as I attempt to cover up a patch of nearly bald scalp on the
top of my head.
For someone who has long been fanatical about the appearance of
her hair, this absence of hair has proven to be quite a challenge to
my ego and self-confidence. I’ve always enjoyed styling my hair,
and suddenly, I have nothing to style.
Each time I begin to experience a new pang of disgust and despair
over this new hair anomaly, I once again ask myself why we are so
36

obsessed with the hair on our heads. The answer always comes to
me in a flash, in a simple two-word phrase: pure vanity. Soon after
this realization, I cease my crying. (97)
84.
A. NO CHANGE
B. obsessed
C. obsessing
D. obsessioned
85.
A. NO CHANGE
B. pay
C. paying money
D. have paid
86.
A. NO CHANGE
B. to have
C. to be
D. becoming for
87.
A. NO CHANGE
B. however
C. yet
D. and
88.
A. NO CHANGE
B. result for
C. result with
D. result by
37

89.
A. NO CHANGE
B. rapidly mixing
C. mixed rapidly in
D. rapidly mix in to
90.
A. NO CHANGE
B. ago to
C. ago: to
D. ago to,
91.
A. NO CHANGE
B. was being
C. could of been
D. was
92.
A. NO CHANGE
B. well, except
C. well except
D. well. Except
93.
A. NO CHANGE
B. Also
C. Instead
D. In light of this
94.
For the sake of logic and coherence, Sentence 5 should
38

be placed:
A. where it is now.
B. before Sentence 1.
C. after Sentence 2.
D. before Sentence 4.
95.
A. NO CHANGE
B. she was gathering
C. she had been gathering
D. she gathered
96.
A. NO CHANGE
B. along with
C. or
D. as well as
97. The writer is considering deleting the preceding sentence. If the
sentence was deleted, the essay would
primarily lose:
A. a summary of the essay.
B. the narrator’s ability to put her situation into perspective.
C. a stylistic link to the essay’s introduction.
D. an understanding of the author’s purpose in writing the essay.
98. Suppose the writer had chosen to write a how-to article for
people wanting to change their hair color. Would this essay fulfill
the writer’s goal?
A. Yes, because the author’s approach to changing her own hair
color would ease the anxiety of others wishing to do the same.
B. Yes, because this essay emphasizes the universality of people
changing their hairstyles and hair color.
39

C. No, because this article only deals with the narrator’s own
experimentation with her hair and does not provide steps for others
to do the same.
D. No, because the essay discourages people from changing their
hair color.
For questions 99 – 113:
Passage 2

“A Modern Blacksmith”
You will probably never find his name in a history book, but to this
day, Walker Lee continues to contribute to America heritage (99).
Walker Lee is an old-fashioned, modernday blacksmith who still
practices (100) the fine art of manipulating metal over a hot fire. In
his words, “Blacksmithing is no dying art!”
Walker Lee had began (101) his career in hand-forged ironwork at
the age of 30. The idea of creating an object out of iron, a most
intractable material (102), appealed to him. He started on this new
venture by collecting and reading every book he could find that
described the process of blacksmithing: its history, its practical and
decorative uses, and the equipment needed to establish and outfit
his own smithy. During the course of his research, Lee discovered
a tool necessary for the success of any blacksmith: the anvil, a
heavy block of iron or steel upon which the blacksmith hammered
and shaped the malleable metal.
Lee bought his first anvil from 84-year-old Hurley Alford Templeton
of Philadelphia, lugging (103) it home to Michigan in the back of a
4-H county bus. This anvil weighed 100 pounds, about the
minimum size Walker Lee needed to get started (104) in his craft.
Lee’s first anvil cost him $100, and four months later, he paid $75
for an additional implement—a vice—from Cornell University in
New York. This important tool also made its (105) way back to
Michigan in the back of Lee’s 4-H bus.
40

Lee had spent the summer carting 4-H groups out from Michigan to
the east coast for various county fairs and expositions. (106)
Once Lee obtained his first portable forge, he was ready to build his
blacksmith shop, commonly referred to as a “smithy.” (107) In the
interest of economy, he constructed this shop out of inexpensive
oak planks and tarpaper. It was a crude little shack but stood for
(108) only nine years. Lee, who by then was completely hooked on
blacksmithing, replaced his first shop with a finer one made of more
expensive wood; this shop also had glass windows, a definite
improvement over Lee’s original “smithy.”
[1] The very first object Lee forged was a long, pointed (109)
Hudson Bay dagger. [2] Many people refer to this type of knife as a
“dag.” [3] As he recalls that event he says, “From the minute I first
saw the thing take shape, I was hooked . . . still am. There’s an
element of magic in it to me. You heat it up and pound it with a
hammer and it goes where you want it to go.”
[4] Years later at a family event Lee (110), Discovered that his
Italian ancestors were accomplished coppersmiths. [5] During the
gathering, Lee’s great uncle Johnny was proclaiming (111) that
Lee’s propensity for blacksmithing was “in the blood” as he happily
presented Lee with a new 125-pound anvil. (112)
As an outside observer watches (113) Walker Lee bending and
shaping a hot metal rod into some recognizable form, it is difficult to
discern the origin of the magic Lee spoke of; is it in the glowing,
orange steel or in Walker himself?

99.
A. NO CHANGE
B. American heritage.
C. Americas heritage.
D. American’s heritage.
41

100.
A. NO CHANGE
B. who still continues to practice
C. who continues to still practice
D. who practices still
101.
A. NO CHANGE
B. had begun
C. begun
D. began
102.
Which of the following alternatives to the underlined portion would
NOT be acceptable?
A. one of the most intractable metals, iron,
B. a most intractable material, that being iron
C. iron (a most intractable material)
D. a most intractable material, iron,
103. Which choice most emphasizes the difficulty in moving the
large anvil?
A. NO CHANGE
B. taking
C. driving
D. transporting

104. At this point, the writer wants to express how Lee first
began the craft of blacksmithing. Which choice would
most effectively accomplish this task?
A. NO CHANGE
B. continue
42

C. keep going
D. move on

105.
A. NO CHANGE
B. it’s
C. its’
D. the
106.
A. NO CHANGE
B. Carting 4-H groups out from Michigan to the east
coast for various county fairs and expositions, Lee
had spent the summer.
C. Lee had spent the summer, for various county
fairs and expositions, carting 4-H groups out from
Michigan to the east coast.
D. OMIT the underlined portion.

107. Given that all of the choices are true, which one
would most effectively introduce the subject of this
paragraph?
A. NO CHANGE
B. Obtaining a portable forge for the shop proved to
be Lee’s biggest challenge.
C. Blacksmith shops can be difficult to construct, but
the most challenging task is moving the necessary
equipment into it.
D. A blacksmith’s forge requires some type of blower
in order to keep the fire hot enough to bend the
steel.

43

108.
A. NO CHANGE
B. that stood for
C. which standing for
D. and stands for

109.
A. NO CHANGE
B. long pointed,
C. long, and pointed
D. long-pointed

110.
A. NO CHANGE
B. later at a family, event Lee
C. later, at a family event, Lee,
D. later, at a family event, Lee
111.
A. NO CHANGE
B. proclaimed
C. had been proclaiming
D. having proclaimed
112. Which of the following sentences in this paragraph is
LEAST relevant to the main focus of the essay and,
therefore, could be deleted?
A. Sentence 2
B. Sentence 3
C. Sentence 4
D. Sentence 5
44

113.
A. NO CHANGE
B. was watching
C. had been watching
D. watched
For questions 114 – 128:
Passage 3

“Unfulfilled Promises”
If you have ever entered a contest of any sort—you (114) are well
aware of the legal requirements, exclusions, and disclaimers that
always accompany (115) the contest’s entry form. Many laws today
regulate a contest sponsor’s responsibilities to the entrants, and
courts are filled with lawsuits asserting with non-compliance (116)
on both sides.
However, this was not always the case. In 1896, a contest
motivated a Norwegian immigrant, Helga Estby, to travel nearly
3,500 miles on foot (117) from the state of Washington to New York
City. Unfortunately, as is still sometimes true, Helga won the
competition only to find that the promise (118) $10,000 award was
mysteriously absent.
[1] Helga had been living (119) on her farm with her husband and
nine children in Spokane, Washington, when she read of a $10,000
prize being offered to a woman who was willing to walk across the
country. [2] Because the Estby farm was facing foreclosure, Helga
decided that walking across the country in a bicycle skirt for that
kind of money was a small price to pay for a greater rewarding.
(120)
[3] At the time, this style of skirt was considered to be inappropriate
because it revealed the female ankle. [4] The only requirement,
from all accounts, was that she wear a modern, newfangled bicycle
skirt as she traveled. (121)
45

So, in May of 1896, Helga and her 18-year-old daughter, Clara, had
set off (122) on their long journey.
Helga carried a revolver and a spray gun containing red pepper for
protection. (123) Presumably, Helga and Clara found food and
shelter along the way, and they arrived in New York City in
December, seven months after their departure. The contest
sponsors, however, were to be found nowhere. (124)
This story of bravery and persistence had therefore been kept a
secret (125) for nearly a century, primarily because Helga’s sevenmonth absence from the farm wreaked havoc on her family. Two of
her children died of diphtheria while she was gone. Even worse, her
husband had sequestered the surviving children in an unheated
shed, thinking that this was the only way to keep them from being
infected with the disease. Since the contest sponsor failed to award
Helga the money, the Estbys ended up losing the farm; her
expedition had been a disaster.
At the time, Helga’s trip was considered an embarrassment by the
Norwegian-American community and was kept utterly quiet. After
Helga’s death, her own children burned the hundreds of pages
Helga had written through the years, leaving only (126) a small
scrapbook of newspaper clippings and very few details of Helga’s
life or her ill-fated trip.
Looking back 100 years, one can only marvel at the boldness and
bravery that must have energized Helga Estby to make that journey
on foot across the country in an effort to save her family farm.(127)
(128)
114.
A. NO CHANGE
B. sort; you
C. sort you
D. sort, you
46

115.
A. NO CHANGE
B. always are accompanying
C. accompany always
D. are accompanying
116.
A. NO CHANGE
B. lawsuits asserting non-compliance
C. lawsuits of non-compliance asserting
D. non-compliance lawsuits asserting
117.
A. NO CHANGE
B. on foot, 3,500 miles
C. 3,500 miles on feet
D. 3,500 miles per foot
118.
A. NO CHANGE
B. promise for the
C. promised
D. promising

119.
A. NO CHANGE
B. been living
C. has been living
D. had lived

47

120.
A. NO CHANGE
B. greatly rewarding
C. great reward
D. greatest reward
121. Which of the following sequences of sentences makes this
paragraph most logical?
A. NO CHANGE
B. 1, 3, 2, 4
C. 3, 2, 4, 1
D. 1, 4, 3, 2

122.
A. NO CHANGE
B. have set off
C. set off
D. went to set off
123.
A. NO CHANGE
B. For protection, Helga carried a revolver as well as
a red pepper-containing spray gun.
C. Helga, for protection, she carried a revolver and a
spray gun containing red pepper.
D. Carried by Helga for protection were a revolver
and a spray gun containing red pepper.
124.
A. NO CHANGE
B. were nowhere when found
C. to be found nowhere
48

D. were nowhere to be found
125.
A. NO CHANGE
B. had been kept a secret
C. had been actually kept a secret
D. had in fact been kept a secret
126.
A. NO CHANGE
B. years leaving only
C. years; leaving only
D. years leaving only,
127. Given that all of the choices are true, which one would best
conclude the sentence while providing the reader with the most
specific explanation for Helga’s motivation to walk across the
country?
A. NO CHANGE
B. to win $10,000.
C. in an effort to save her children from diphtheria.
D. to help her daughter Clara gain experience.
128. At this point, the writer is considering adding the following
sentence:
In 1984, Helga’s great-great-grandson wrote a story about his
ancestor for a history assignment. Should the writer make this
addition here?
A. Yes, because it links the ending of the essay to its introduction.
B. Yes, because this information is highly relevant to the rest of the
essay.
C. No, because this story might not focus on Helga’s farm.
D. No, because this information introduces a new subtopic of the
essay.
49

Questions 129 – 133: Choose the word closest to the meaning to
the underlined word in the sentence.
129. The corrupt policeman was discharged from service due to his
ignominious act of accepting bribes.
A. honorable
B. disrespectable
C. unwanted
D. remarkable
130. Jacqueline is an irascible girl who frequently has tantrums.
A. impatient
B. cheerful
C. hot-tempered
D. jolly
131. The piquant mouse was able to find its way out of the maze in
a short while.
A. dumb
B. clever
C. small
D. unusual
132. Only a ruffian could do such a heinous act of killing a helpless
child.
A. an insane person
B. a brutal person
C. a lovable person
D. a confused person
133. The plane overshot the runway and landed on a ditch.
A. passed through
50

B. passed by
C. went beyond
D. did not reach

Questions 134 – 138: Choose the word opposite in meaning to the
underlined word in the sentence.
134. The garrulous girls were distanced from each other.
A. mute
B. talkative
C. behaved
D. quiet

135. The players were confused when the kibitzers suddenly
butted-in during the team’s huddle.
A. advisers
B. spectators
C. onlookers
D. crowd
136. Mahirap pakinggan ang sinasabi ng taong garil.
A. utal
B. bulol
C. matalino
D. matatas
137. Hungkag ang bigasan dahil nasira ng bagyo ang mga palay.
A. salat
B. puno
C. bulok
D. bago
51

138. Maantak ang sugat kapag napatakan ng kalamansi.
A. malaki
B. maliit
C. manhid
D. mahapdi

Questions 139 – 140: Piliin ang salitang kasing-kahulugan ng
salitang nakapahilig.
139. Dahil sa paulit-ulit na pagsisinungaling, basa ang papel niya
sa karamihan.
A. ayaw nang paniwalaan
B. ayaw nang pagbigyan
C. ayaw nang pakinggan
D. ayaw nang makasama
140. Ni ayaw man lamang humarap sa tao ang talo-saling na si
Eula.
A. masungit
B. isnabera
C. mahiyain
D. pangit

Questions 141 – 143: Choose the sentence that best combines the
underlined sentences.
141. The airport is called the Glynco Jetport. The airline
reservations and travel systems refer to its location as Brunswick,
Georgia.
52

A. Where the airport is called the Glynco Jetport, the airline
reservations and travel systems refer to the location as Brunswick,
Georgia.
B. But the airport is called the Glynco Jetport, the airline
reservations and travel systems refer to the location as Brunswick,
Georgia.
C. Even though the airline reservations and travel systems refer to
the location as Brunswick, Georgia, the airport is called the Glynco
Jetport.
D. When the airport is called the Glynco Jetport, the airline
reservations refer to the location as Brunswick, Georgia, and the
travel systems.
142. Plato believed that boys and girls should be given an equal
education. This idea is rarely mentioned in textbooks.
A. Plato believed that boys and girls should be given an equal
education, where this idea is rarely mentioned in textbooks.
B. Plato believed that boys and girls should be given an equal
education, an idea that is rarely mentioned in textbooks.
C. Believing that boys and girls should be given an equal
education, Plato’s idea is rarely mentioned in textbooks.
D. Plato believed that boys and girls should be given an equal
education, whereupon this idea is rarely mentioned in textbooks.
143. Recently there have been government cutbacks in funds.
Experts foresee steady hiring in the government’s future.
A. Despite recent government cutbacks in funds, experts foresee
steady hiring in the government’s future.
B. Whereupon recent government cutbacks in funds, experts
foresee steady hiring in the government’s future.
C. So that there have been recent government cutbacks in funds,
experts foresee steady hiring in the government’s future.
D. Nonetheless, there have been recent government cutbacks in
funds, experts foresee steady hiring in the government’s future.

53

Questions 144 -150: Fill in the blank with the word that creates the
most logical sentence.
144. Ruby loves blueberry pie _________ it is made with freshly
picked blueberries.
A. whether
B. because
C. when
D. as if
145. _________ our low annual fee, you will receive a 20%
discount if you sign up this week.
A. Because
B. While
C. In spite of
D. In addition to
146. I ________ the speech you gave last Thursday night, but I
was in bed with the flu.
A. will have heard
B. would hear
C. might hear
D. would have heard
147. . ________ the Beatles’ most popular songs— most of which
were written by Lennon and McCartney—are “I Want to Hold Your
Hand” and “Hey, Jude.”
A. With
B. Considering
C. Among
D. To
148. My neighbor is deathly afraid of dogs; ___________, I never
let my Golden Retriever, Sandy, outside without a leash.
54

A. moreover
B. yet
C. mainly
D. consequently
149. The ticket said the show would start at 8:00, but the curtains
didn’t go up _________ 8:30.
A. less than
B. until
C. about
D. since
150. A large percentage of the class _______ fascinated by the
museum.
A. was
B. be
C. any of the above
D. were

55

3
Science
Directions: Read the questions carefully and choose the letter that
corresponds to your answer.
1. All of the following are solutions except _____.
A. Brass
B. Coffee
C. Seawater
D. Milk
2. How come a person with type B blood cannot donate to a person
with type A blood?
A. The recipient has antibodies against B blood, which has Bantigens, resulting in clotting up the donated blood.
B. The recipient has B surface antigens that can be
recognized by antibodies of the donor, resulting in rejection
of the donated blood.
C. Both A and B are true.
D. None of the above statements are true.

56

3. How many moles of CO2 does 88 grams of Carbon
Dioxide contain?
A. 2
B. 3
C. 4
D. 5
4. Weathering is the process that changes solid rock into
sediments. With weathering, rock is disintegrated. It breaks into
pieces. However, rocks on the moon are not being weathered.
Which of the following is the reason for this?
A. There is no atmosphere on the moon.
B. There is no water on the moon.
C. There is no volcano on the moon.
D. The gravity on the moon is very small.

5. Each of two replicated strands of a chromosome is called a(n)
A. aster.
B. centriole.
C. synapse.
D. chromatid.
6. Storm surge is an abnormal rise of water generated by a storm. It
creates a change in the water level due to the presence of the
storm. The rise may come rapidly, flooding coastal lowlands in the
process. PAGASA predicted a storm surge will hit the Philippines
even before
Typhoon Yolanda entered the country but they did not expect the
damages to be that massive. The storm surge that accompanied
Yolanda was described as tsunami-like. This is somehow
reminiscent of the tsunami that hit Japan in the year 2011.
57

Tsunamis can be created when there is a sudden disturbance on
the Earth’s crust and deformation on the sea floor. This deformation
vertically displaces the overlying water and creates violent
underwater disturbance. What is the main characteristic of
tsunamis that differentiates it from a storm surge?
A. Tsunamis are tidal waves.
B. Tsunamis are created when a body of water is displaced usually
by an earthquake.
C. Tsunamis are always accompanied by typhoons and other forms
of weather disturbances.
D. Tsunamis are single waves that only hit the shorelines by the
Pacific Ocean.

7. If Wes applies 100 newtons of force on a 2-meter wrench at a
right angle to the wrench and parallel to the plane of rotation, how
much torque, in newton-meters (N-m), is he applying to the bolt?
A. 200 N-m
B. 100 N-m
C. 50 N-m
D. 25 N-m
8. If two flies heterozygous for wing length and body color are
crossed, which of the following are possible results?
A. chance of L, long wings = 3/4
B. chance of l, short wings = 1/2
C. chance of G, grey body = 1/4
D. all of the above are true
9. Which chemical bonds are considered the strongest, requiring
the most energy to break?
A. ionic bonds
58

B. van der Waals forces
C. hydrogen bonds
D. covalent bonds
10. The eruption of Mt. Pinatubo caused widespread destruction
and loss of human life. Gases and solids injected into the
stratosphere circled the globe for three weeks. Volcanic eruptions
of this magnitude can impact global climate, reducing the amount of
solar radiation reaching the Earth's surface, lowering temperatures
in the troposphere, and changing atmospheric circulation patterns.
Which of the following was an effect of the Mt. Pinatubo eruption?
A. an increase of the Earth’s temperature by 2˚C
B. massive global warming
C. El niño phenomenon
D. lowered global temperature by 0.5˚

11. Which of these would be least likely to diffuse across the
phospholipid bilayer of a cell membrane?
A. water
B. sodium ions
C. oxygen
D. carbon dioxide
12. The bacteria that causes syphilis is
A. a coccus.
B. E. coli.
C. a bacillus.
D. a spirochete.
13. Give the mass number for an atom that has 10 protons, 10
electrons, and 11 neutrons.
A. 31
59

B. 20
C. 10
D. 21
14. The graph below shows the change in energy that occurs
during a chemical reaction. Which of the following is most likely to
happen as the reaction nears completion?

A. The reaction releases energy to its surroundings.
B. The energy level of the reactants remains constant.
C. The reaction takes in energy from its surroundings
D. The energy level of the reactants increases gradually.
15. Cloud seeding can be done by dispersing Silver Iodide or dry
ice (solid carbon dioxide) into clouds to induce precipitation. Cloud
seeding has also been used to dissipate fog, modify hurricanes,
and decrease lightning and hail in thunderstorms. The results have
been remarkable but never guaranteed increase precipitation on all
trials. The Beijing Weather Modification Office has researched on
the application of cloud seeding to control weather. During the 2008
Beijing Olympics, the Chinese governments executed cloud
seeding to clear the air of pollutants and to keep it from raining over
the Bird’s Nest stadium while the games were going on. They
managed to deliver as they have promised.
60

What could be an obvious negative effect of cloud seeding in
China?
A. Excessive precipitation and unanticipated drought
B. Significant increase of Silver contamination on crops and water
C. Unpredictable weather
D. Increase in thunderstorms and typhoons that may hit the country
within the same year of cloud seeding in the area
16. During ______, the chromosomes attach to the spindle and
align at the metaphase plate of the spindle.
A. prophase
B. prometaphase
C. metaphase
D. anaphase
17. Geothermal systems produce electricity from what energy
source?
A. heat from the Sun
B. mechanical energy from wind
C. heat from Earth’s interior
D. mechanical energy from waves
18. Gravitational potential energy is energy an object possesses
because of its position in a gravitational field. Which of the following
has the most gravitational potential energy?
A. A truck at the top of a hill
B. A truck speeding down the hill
C. A man on top of the hill
D. A man on his mountain bike speeding down the hill
61

19. The proportion of adenine bases in a sample of DNA was found
to be 12%. Which of the following statements is true? The
proportion of
A. uracil bases in the sample is 12%.
B. thyroxine bases in the sample is 12%.
C. uracil bases in the sample is 88%.
D. cytosine bases in the sample is 38%.
20. If a single-celled saltwater organism is placed in freshwater, it
will not be able to survive. Which statement explains why this is
true?
A. The organism’s cell will absorb too much water through osmosis.
B. The organism’s cell will absorb too many sodium ions through
osmosis.
C. The organism’s cell will release too many hydrogen ions through
diffusion.
D. The organism’s cell will release too much water through
facilitated diffusion.
21. Starting as a gas at 206°C, a sample of a substance is allowed
to cool for 16 minutes. This process is represented by the cooling
curve below.

Temperature (°C)

Cooling Curve for a Substance

What is the melting point of this substance?
A. 206°C
B. 150°C
Time (min)
62

C. 90°C
D. 50°C

22. Protozoa are placed in different classes according to their
A. movement.
B. color.
C. shape.
D. size.
23. Refer to the diagram below.
Sediments
B

A

Igneous
Rocks

Sedimentary
Rocks

C

Melting
Metamorphic
Rocks

Which of the following is TRUE?
I. Path A is uplift, weathering, erosion, deposition
II. Path B is heating and crystallization.
III. Heat and pressure are responsible for path C.
A. I and II only
B. I and III only
C. II and III only
D. I, II, and III
63

24. Agglutination is the
A. clumping of students in hallways.
B. clumping of platelets to help stop bleeding.
C. clumping of white blood cells around bacteria.
D. clumping of blood cells due to an antibody-antigen reaction.
25. The figure below shows resistors connected in series and
parallel. If the total resistance from A to B is 6 Ω, find the resistance
of R.
1Ω

1Ω

2Ω

3Ω

A

B
R

A. 1 Ω
B. 2 Ω
C. 3 Ω
D. 4 Ω

26. What mass, in g, of hydrogen gas is formed when 3.0 mol of
aluminum react with excess hydrochloric acid according to the
following equation?
2Al(s) + 6HCl(aq) 2AlCl3(aq) + 3H2(g)
A. 3.0
B. 4.5
C. 6.0
D. 9.0
64

27. Removing all lone pairs of electrons on the central atom of ClF 3
would change the geometry from
A. trigonal pyramidal to trigonal planar.
B. from square shaped to trigonal pyramidal.
C. from T–shaped to trigonal planar.
D. from trigonal bipyramidal to trigonal planar.
28. Differences between eukaryotic and prokaryotic cells include all
of the following except ______.
A. eukaryotic cells have mitochondria
B. eukaryotic cells have cilia and flagella with complex structure
C. prokaryotic cells have more complex cell walls
D. prokaryotic cells have no genetic material
29. Which electromagnetic wave has the shortest
wavelength?
A. Radio
B. UV
C. Visible Light
D. Gamma
30. I lack respiratory, excretory, and circulatory systems, have
bilateral larva, deuterostome development, and move using a water
vascular system. What am I?
A. echinoderm
B. chordate
C. jellyfish
D. mollusc
31. Assuming that complete dominance is followed, which of the
following genotypes has the same phenotype as QQRrssTt?
65

A. AABbccDd
B. QqRRssTT
C. Qqrrsstt
D. QQRrSsTt

32. What percent of a parent isotopes remains after 2 half-lives?
A. 50%
B. 25%
C. 6.25%
D. 2%
33. Which factors are involved in Gay-Lussac’s Law?
A. Pressure and Temperature
B. Pressure and Volume
C. Temperature and Volume
D. Volume and Moles
34. Potassium-40 is used to determine the age of rocks. The
diagram below shows a rock sample in which some of the
potassium-40 atoms have undergone radioactive decay. According
to the diagram, how many half-lives has the rock sample
undergone?

A. 9 half-lives
B. 3 half-lives
66

C. 2 half-lives
D. 1 half-life
35. The tendency of an object to resist changes in motion
is dependent on:
A. Weight
B. Temperature
C. Speed
D. Mass
36. What the value does 6.02 x 1023 represent?
A. The number of particles in a mole
B. The number of particles per atom in a substance.
C. The density of moles per square nanometer.
D. The length of time for a material to decompose
37. Which of the following pairs are analogous structures?
A. the front leg of a horse and a human arm
B. the front leg of a frog and a bat wing
C. the wing of a bird and a bat wing
D. the front flipper of a porpoise and a human arm
38. What enzyme in saliva breaks down sugars?
A. Aqua-enzymes
B. Amylase
C. Adenine
D. Glyoxalase

67

39. Molality, m, is defined as number of moles of solute per kg of
solvent. If 230 g of ethanol (C2H5OH) is added to 500 g of water,
what is the molality of the solution?
A. 0.46 m
B. 1 m
C. 2.17 m
D. 10 m

40. How much time should it take for a traveling bullet to hit the
ground compared to a bullet dropped from rest? Assume the
ground remains flat for the entire distance the bullet may travel.
A. The traveling bullet will take longer to hit the ground than the
bullet dropped from rest
B. The traveling bullet will hit the ground at the same time as the
bullet dropped from rest
C. The traveling bullet will hit the ground before the bullet dropped
from rest
D. The traveling bullet moves so fast that it will never hit the ground

41. A scientist performed an experiment where he knocked out the
genes of a mouse cell responsible for producing the Golgi complex.
Which of the following could be a consequence of the experiment to
mice lacking the gene?
A. Mice would grow to be fat, and obese, since there would
be no regulation of lipid synthesis.
B. Mice would develop uncontrolled mutations over the
course of its life, since production of proteins has been
hampered.
C. Mice won’t grow or develop into adults, and will live for only
a few days or weeks, since proteins won’t be processed
properly and they wouldn’t know where to go after they’re
synthesized.
68

D. The mice will be lethargic since they won’t be able to
process absorbed nutrients to transform them into energy
in the form of ATP.

42. What enzyme in saliva breaks down sugars?
A. Aqua-enzymes
B. Amylase
C. Adenine
D. Glyoxalase
43. Specific gravity is the ratio of the density of substance to the
density of water. Suppose the specific gravity of liquid X is 1.2.
Which of the following will not float in liquid X?
A. Water
B. A 1000-cm3 object whose mass is 750 g
C. A solid object whose specific gravity is 0.9
D. A liquid whose specific gravity is 1.3

44. Vitamins help to control chemical reactions in our bodies.
Without vitamins certain reactions cannot take place. We need only
tiny amounts of vitamins, but without them we will suffer from
deficiency diseases, like the lack of vitamin D will lead to
A. beriberi
B. rickets
C. scurvy
D. night blindness
45. In which population would you expect the most rapid
evolutionary change?
A. a small population with a high mutation rate in a changing
environment
69

B. a small population with a low mutation rate in a stable
environment
C. a large population with a high mutation rate in a changing
environment
D. a large population with a low mutation rate in a stable
environment
46. In a species of pea plant, white flowers were completely
dominant over red flowers. Pure breeding, white flowered pea
plants are crossed with pure breeding, red-flowered pea plants.
What proportion of white- and red-colored plants will be produced in
the F1 generation?
A. all white-flowered plants.
B. all red-flowered plants.
C. a 3 : 1 ratio of white-flowered plants to red-flowered plants.
D. a 3 : 1 ratio of red-flowered plants to white-flowered plants.
47. What are the coefficients that will balance the formula equation
below?
A. 1, 3, 1, 3
B. 3, 1, 3, 1
C. 1, 1, 1, 3
D. 1, 3, 3, 1
48. When ice changes from a solid to a liquid at its melting point
A. its temperature increases.
B. heat is given out.
C. its particles gain energy.
D. its particles become more ordered.

70

49. Flowers are the reproductive organs of angiosperms. These
organs have various parts that fall under three groups: (1) male
parts, (2) female parts and (3) accessory parts.
Depending on the present structures, a flower may be
categorized as complete, incomplete, perfect or imperfect.
Which of the following lists of parts describes a perfect flower
but not a complete flower?
A. Pistil, stamen and accessory parts
B. Pistil and accessory parts only
C. Stamen and accessory parts only
D. Pistil and stamen only

Read the passage below to answer questions 50 and 51.
Eutrophication is a phenomenon where excessive amounts of
nutrients are added to a marine ecosystem. These nutrients cause
plant life like algae to multiply rapidly, leading to very high
population densities. In freshwater ecosystems, the algae can
become so dense that it can turn ponds, lakes or even smaller
rivers green. The algae grows to an unreasonable level at a very
fast rate. The algae are known as phytoplankton and are
microscopic, single-celled organisms.
A body of water that is experiencing eutrophication and a resulting
bloom can be quickly devastated. Eutrophication affects all living
organisms in the area including fish, birds and mammals. The top
layer of phytoplankton causes such a build-up on the surface that
they accumulate sediment. When this occurs the sunlight is blocked
and it will choke off the plant life below the surface. The
phytoplankton will also cause less surface area for the water to
interface with air. As a result, there will be less oxygen available in
the water. As oxygen continues to deplete, the depletion can have
a negative effect on life as there will be less oxygen to support the
organisms below the surface that depend on the oxygen from
plants that diffuses into the water.
71

Scientist 1
The root cause of eutrophication is not known. However, the
frequency and increasing incidents of eutrophication point to human
farming activity as the potential cause. The growth of the
phytoplankton is caused by runoff that contains multiple sources of
nitrates that are also found in fertilizer. The nitrates allow for the
phytoplankton to grow rapidly. The solution to the problem is to
either move the drainage so the runoff from the human farming
activity cannot reach the water source or move the farms.
Scientist 2
Sometimes eutrophication can happen naturally without any real
cause. Sometimes when there are periods of heavy rain, the
increase in rain water leads to an imbalance in the pH of the water.
This in turn creates favorable conditions for the phytoplankton to
grow and proliferate. This is a natural cycle that also ensures that
too many fish and other animals do not build up in a freshwater
source. This type of bloom is nature’s way of eliminating
overpopulation with an abiotic factor. Although many organisms will
die as a result, it will help to thin the numbers of organisms and
ensure a healthier freshwater source.
50. According to Scientist 1, which of the following is the cause of
the eutrophication?
A. A change in the pH of the water.
B. The increasing changes in phytoplankton.
C. Agricultural run-off from human activity.
D. The build-up of phosphates in the body of water.
51. What is the main point of disagreement between Scientist 1 and
Scientist 2?
A. The source of the nitrogen.
B. The root cause of the eutrophication.
C. The effects of the lack of oxygen.
D. The effect of the plant life in the aquatic ecosystem.

72

52. A container weighs 90 g when empty and 110 g when fully filled
with water. The density of water is 1.0 g/mL. When the container is
filled instead with liquid X, it weighs 140 g. What is the density of
liquid X?
A. 0.80 g/mL
B. 1.4 g/mL
C. 2.5 g/mL
D. 3.0 g/mL

53. Which of the following is the function of the cotyledon in a
seed?
A. to form the lower portion of the plant.
B. to form the upper portion of the plant.
C. to protect the seed from drying out.
D. to provide nutrients for the germinating plant.
54. Two forces are acting on an object as shown below. What is the
magnitude of the resultant force?

A. 200 N
B. 40 N
C. 66.7 N
D. 185 N

73

55. Torque is the product of the force and the lever arm. In
symbols,
Refer to the diagram below. Two masses, 8 kg and 10 kg, are
hung at both ends of a 90-cm stick. The stick has markings
every 10 cm. If the mass of the stick is negligible, where
should the stick be suspended by means of a cord to remain
the stick horizontal?
A B C D

8 kg

10 kg

A. A
B. B
C. C
D. D

56. Your flashlight has three identical 1.5 volt batteries in it,
arranged in a chain to give a total of 4.5 volts. Current passes first
through battery (a), then through battery (b), then through battery
(c), on its way to the bulb. When you operate the flashlight, the
batteries provide power to the current and they gradually use up
their chemical potential energy. Which battery will run out of
chemical potential energy first?
A. All three will run out at the same time.
B. Battery (a) will run out first.
C. Battery (b) will run out first.
D. Battery (c) will run out first.
74

57. A neutral atom in the ground state contains 16 electrons. What
is the total number of electrons in the 3p sublevel?
A. 2
B. 4
C. 6
D. 8
58. If you balance the equation below, what is the least sum of the
coefficients?
MnO2 + HCl  Cl2 + MnCl2 + H2O
A. 26
B. 15
C. 9
D. 7
59. What is the probability that a father with a
homogenous dominant trait and a mother with the same
homogenous dominant trait will produce an offspring
with the recessive trait?
A. 25%
B. 15%
C. 0%
D. 100%
60. A graduated cylinder is used to measure liquid volume. The
correct way of reading the level of mercury in a graduated cylinder
is
A. read from the top of the meniscus.
B. read from the bottom of the meniscus.
C. use the lowest point of the mercury in the cylinder.
D. take the average of the highest and the lowest points.

75

61. Suppose a cold steel bar (at 10C) and a hot iron block (at
70C) are placed inside the same room at the same time. With
time, the steel bar and the iron block are brought to thermal
equilibrium with the room. The final temperature of the room is
25C. What are the final temperature of the steel bar and the iron
block?
A. Steel bar (at 40C), iron block (at 25C)
B. Steel bar (at 25C), iron block (at 40C)
C. Steel bar (at 40C), iron block (at 40C)
D. Steel bar (at 25C), iron block (at 25C)

62. Mount Mayon is what type of volcano?
A. Stratovolcano
B. Shield
C. Caldera
D. Cinder
63. The radioactive half-life of a certain isotope is 2 days. What part
of this isotope will remain after 8 days?
A. ½
B. ¼
C. 1/8
D. 1/16
64. The circulatory system has three main components: (1) the
pumping organ – the heart, (2) the circulating medium – the blood
and (3) the passageways of blood – the blood vessels.
Furthermore, there are three types of blood vessels: capillaries,
arteries and veins. Capillaries are the site of gas exchange
between the blood and the bodily tissues. Arteries carry blood away
from the heart while veins carry blood towards the heart. Apart from
these differences in function, these three types of blood vessels all
have different morphological features.
76

Arteries have much thicker walls than veins. What is the
significance of the thicker walls for arteries?
A. Arteries normally carry oxygenated blood – which require
flowing through thicker vessels in order to preserve the
oxygen content.
B. Arteries receive greater blood pressure than the veins. The
greater blood pressure would threaten destroying thinwalled blood vessels, warranting thicker walls for arteries.
C. Veins have valves that prevent back-flow of blood. The
valves are designed to work in thin walled vessels.
D. Veins normally carry deoxygenated blood – which does not
require flowing through thicker vessels in order to preserve
the oxygen content.

65. Mixtures can be classified as homogenous or heterogenous
and can be separated by simple means. Solutions and suspensions
A. are both compounds.
B. are both examples of a homogenous mixture.
C. are both examples of a heterogenous mixture.
D. can be separated into components by physical means.
66. Which of the following cases is/are NOT a uniformly
accelerated motion?
(1) A feather falls from a certain height inside a vacuum tube.
(2) A ball rolls along a frictionless plane at uniform speed.
(3) A coin falls from a certain height in air but air resistance is
negligible.
A. (1) only
B. (2) only
C. (1) and (2) only
D. (2) and (3) only
77

67. The main reason why one can possibly walk barefoot on a redhot wooden coals without burning the feet is
A. the low thermal conductivity of coal.
B. the high temperature of coal.
C. the low temperature of coal.
D. the stepping techniques.
68. Global climate change can be attributed to the increase in what
two gases produced by human activities?
A. nitrous oxide and sulfur dioxide
B. methane and carbon dioxide
C. ozone and carbon dioxide
D. ozone and methane

69. A stone is thrown into the air at an angle. Neglecting air
resistance, what is the stone’s velocity upon reaching its maximum
height?
A. zero
B. equal to the horizontal component of its initial velocity
C. equal to the vertical component of its initial velocity
D. equal to the acceleration due to gravity

70. Which of the following characterizes water?
A. Water releases only heat quickly.
B. Water releases and gains heat quickly.
C. Water releases and gains heat slowly.
D. Water gains only heat slowly.

78

71. How many star/s is/are there in our solar system?
A.1
B. 1 million
C. 1 billion
D. infinitely many
72. If the volume of a gas at a certain pressure is halved, ______.
A. its temperature is halved
B. its temperature is doubled
C. its temperature remains constant
D. its temperature increases according to a geometric progression
73. The reason why we see eclipses of the Moon more often than
solar eclipses, even though solar eclipses happen more frequently
is that
A. lunar eclipses are visible over more than half of Earth compared
to less than 20% of Earth’s surface for partial solar eclipses.
B. the weather is more cloudy during the new moon.
C. a lunar eclipse lasts longer than a solar eclipse.
D. people are not so interested in the solar eclipse.
74. What measurement is used to quantify the destruction caused
by an earthquake?
A. the Richter scale
B. the modified Mercalli scale
C. the moment magnitude scale
D. the moment destruction scale

75. Igeneous rocks originate when magma or lava cools and
crystallizes or when pyroclastic materials are consolidated. The two
categories of igneous rocks are plutonic rocks, which form within
79

the earth’s crust, and volcanic rocks, which form at the surface.
Volcanic rocks can usually be distinguished from plutonic rocks by
A. its color
B. its composition
C. its iron-magnesium content
D. the size of its mineral crystals
76. When a lit match is touched to the wick of a candle, the candle
begins to burn. When the match is removed, the candle continues
to burn. In this reaction, the match ______.
A. behaves as a catalyst.
B. supplies activation energy.
C. is part of the rate determining step.
D. lowers the activation energy barrier
77. Specific gravity is the ratio of the density of substance to the
density of water. Suppose the specific gravity of liquid X is 1.2.
Which of the following will not float in liquid X?
A. Water
B. A 1000-cm3 object whose mass is 750 g
C. A solid object whose specific gravity is 0.9
D. A liquid whose specific gravity is 1.3

78. The solidification of molten rock from inside or outside the earth
causes the formation of igneous rocks. These rocks are
characterized by the presence of large or small crystals, depending
on the rate of cooling of the rocks. Granite is an intrusive igneous
rock that cooled beneath the earth’s crust, and has large crystals.
What is the most probable reason for this?
A. Extreme pressures at the bottom create larger crystals.
B. Gravity causes the heavier crystals to collect at the bottom
of intrusive igneous rocks.
80

C. Hotter temperatures act as a catalyst to increase the rate
of crystal formation in intrusive igneous rocks.
D. Hotter temperatures beneath the earth’s crust decrease the
cooling rate, allowing more time to grow larger crystals.

79. 1 atm is equal to ______ Torr.
A. 700
B. 720
C. 273
D. 760
80. Based on the following periodic table, which two elements have
a half-filled p orbital?
Be

N O

Na

Al Si

K

Fe Co
Sb
Ba

I

Os

A. Nitrogen and antimony
B. Iron and cobalt
C. Barium and osmium
D. Sodium and potassium

81. Of the first 101 elements, which is the most
unstable?
81

A. Francium
B. Plutonium
C. Arsenic
D. Uranium
82. Which element is the most electronegative?
A. Neon
B. Francium
C. Sodium
D. Fluorine
83. In snapdragons, red flowers represent the RR genotype while
white flowers represent the rr genotype. Upon breeding red and
white flowers, the offsprings were neither red nor white, instead
they were pink. What mode of inheritance is exhibited by the
snapdragons?
A. Codominance
B. Dominance
C. Incomplete Dominance
D. Sex-influenced

84. What is the most common isotope of Carbon?
A. Carbon-12
B. Carbon 16
C. Carbon-14
D. Carbon-13
85. Suppose two hypothetical organisms with blue eyes have an
offspring with red eyes. Assuming that this trait obeys the
82

Mendelian laws of inheritance, which among the following
statements is TRUE?
A. Red eye color is the dominant trait.
B. The red-eyed offspring has a homozygous dominant
genotype.
C. The parents both have a heterozygous genotype.
D. The red-eyed offspring has a heterozygous genotype.

86. Mechanical and chemical weathering result in disintegration
and decomposition of parent material so that it is more nearly in
equilibrium with new physical and chemical conditions. Mechanical
weathering involves forces that break rocks into smaller pieces
without changing their chemical composition. Which mechanical
weathering process involved in the origin of exfoliation domes?
A. pressure release
B. expansion and contraction
C. heating and cooling
D. oxidation and reduction

87. Rock and dust samples brought back from the Moon by the
Apollo missions in the 1980s were more similar to Earth’s mantle
than to meteorites that struck the Earth. Which of the following
statements is true about Earth’s tock and moon’s rock?
A. Rocks on Earth are much younger than those on the moon.
B. Rocks on Earth are much older than those on the moon.
C. Rocks on Earth are about the same age as rocks on the
moon.
D. Moon rocks do not have age.
88. Newton’s first law of motion states that “Every object remains at
rest or in motion in a straight line at constant speed unless acted
83

upon by an unbalanced force.” What is the net force acting on an
airplane in level flight at 500 kph due north?
A. 100 N
B. 490 N
C. 980 N
D. 0
89. What is the molar concentration of NaCl solution that contains
30 grams of salt per 200 mL of solution?
A. 0.15 M
B. 0.30 M
C. 1.3 M
D. 2.6 M
90. What is the limiting reagent for the following chemical reaction if
24 grams of hydrogen and 48 grams of oxygen react to form water?
2H2 + O22H2O
A. Hydrogen
B. Oxygen
C. Water
D. This reaction has no limiting reagent.
91. Coulomb’s law and Newton’s law of gravitation both involve
which of the following?
A. the inverse square law.
B. the charge on the particle.
C. the mass of the particle.
D. permeability
92. Which among the following is correctly paired?
A. cheddar cheese : heterogeneous
84

B. liquid soap : homogeneous
C. sugar : element
D. orange juice : compound
93. An analysis of a compound used in the production of aluminum
is 32.79% sodium, 13.02 % aluminum and 54.19% fluorine. The
empirical formula of the compound is
A. Na3AlF6
B. Na5AlF8
C. NaAlF
D. Na3AlF3
94. Flooding frequently happens in the Philippines. It may occur
due to an accumulation of rainwater on saturated ground. This can
threaten several lives, properties and even livestock. If there is a
flood, what characteristics of soil would make the situation of
flooding worse within the affected area?
A. high porosity and high permeability
B. high porosity and low permeability
C. low porosity and high permeability
D. low porosity and low permeability

95. The height of the column of mercury in a mercury barometer is
dependent on the following EXCEPT on the
A. diameter of the tube.
B. atmospheric pressure.
C. density of mercury and weather condition.
D. altitude at which the measurement is made.
96. A 7-m rope is stretched between two poles, which are 6-m
apart. A boy is holding on to the middle of the rope and hanging
85

down. If the boy weighs 300 N, what is the tension in the rope on
the right-hand side?
A. 183 N
B. 291 N
C. 425 N
D. 291 N
97. What process can be used on a liquid to
separate its components without losing either
component in the process?
A. Distillation
B. Evaporation
C. Sieving
D. Paper Chromatography
98. What component of hard water makes it “hard”?
A. sodium and nitrogen
B. oxygen and hydrogen
C. large amounts of calcium and magnesium ions
D. large amounts of sodium and carbon dioxide
99. The graphs below show the effects of temperature and pH on
enzyme activity. Which statement explains the enzyme activity at
the point shown?

86

A. At P, hydrogen bonds are formed between enzyme and
substrate.
B. At Q, the kinetic energy of enzyme and substrate is highest.
C. At R, peptide bonds in the enzyme begin to break.
D. At S, the substrate is completely denatured.

100. Excluding the sun, what is the brightest star in the
sky?
A. Sirius
B. Venus
C. Betelgeuse
D. The Big Dipper

87

4
Mathematics
Directions: The Mathematics subtest will test your ability to solve
quantitative problems quickly and accurately. Analyze each
problem and select the best answer from the multiple choices.
To mimic the actual test conditions, you’re not allowed to use
calculators. Because UPCAT is a time-pressured exam, we also
recommend using a timer when taking the practice test.

1. A scuba diver descends 80 feet, rises 25 feet, descends 12
feet, and then rises 52 feet where he will do a safety stop for
five minutes before surfacing. At what depth did he do his
safety stop?
A. -15
B. -14
C. 16
D. 14

2. Evaluate the algebraic expression y{( − 3) − 4a} when
a=3
x=6
88

y=
A. y{( − 3) − 4a} = -5
B. y{( − 3) − 4a} = -7
C. y{( − 3) − 4a} = 5
D. y{( − 3) − 4a} = -6

3. If x is an even integer and y is an odd integer, which of the
following must be an odd integer?
A. 2x + 2y
B. 2x – 2y
C. x + y + 1
D. x + y + 2
4. 35% of 15% of x is equivalent to which of the following?
A. 0.0525x
B. 0.125x
C. 0.25x
D. 0.525x
5. A farmer has a rectangular field that measures 125 feet by
200 feet. He wants to enclose the field with a fence. What is
the total length, in feet, he will need for the job?
A. 450
B. 550
C. 650
D. 750
6. A farmer is raising a hog that weighed 20 lbs. when he
bought it. He expects it to gain 12 pounds per month. He will
89

sell it when it weighs 200 lbs. How many months will it be
before he will sell the animal?
A. 14
B. 15
C. 24
D. 25
7. Twenty-five more girls than the number of boys participate
in interscholastic sports at a local high school. If the number
of girls participating is 105, how many boys participate?
A. 110
B. 115
C. 120
D. 125

Use the following ndiagram to answer questions 8 to 13:

90

8. How many lines can be drawn through •A that are parallel to line
m?
A. 0
B. 1
C. 2
D. Infinite
9. How many lines can be drawn through •A that are perpendicular to
line l?
A. 0
B. 1
C. 10,000
D. Infinite
10. Which lines are perpendicular?
A. n, m
B. o, l
C. l, n
D. m, l
11. How many points do line m and line l share?
A. 0
B. 1
C. 2
D. Infinite

91

12. •A is
A. between lines l and n.
B. on lines l and n.
C. on line l, but not line n.
D. on line n, but not line l.
13. Which set of lines are transversals?
A. l, m, o
B. o, m, n
C. l, o, n
D. l, m, n
14. The triangle ABC that is provided has side lengths of a, b.
and c feet and is not a right triangle. Let A’ be the image when the
triangle is reflected across side BC. Which of the following is an
expression for the perimeter, in feet, of quadrilateral A’BAC?
A. 2 (a + b)
B. 2 (b + c)
C. a + b + 2c
D. 2 ab
15. If 60% of a number is 12, what is 165% of the same number?
A. 30
B. 31
C. 32
D. 33

92

16. What would be the height of a trapezoidal building if, at its
base, it measured 80 feet, its roofline measured 40 feet, and the
surface area of one side was 7,200 ft2?
A. 112 ft.
B. 150 ft.
C. 120 ft.
D. 135 ft.
17. The volume of a cylindrical aquarium tank is 13,565 cubic feet.
If its radius is 12 feet, what is its height to the nearest foot?
A. 73 feet.
B. 27 feet.
C. 42 feet.
D. 30 feet.
18. A cylinder has a surface area of 2,512 square feet. The height
of the cylinder is three times the radius of the base of the cylinder.
Find the radius and the height of the cylinder.
A. r = 5 feet; h = 15 feet
B. r = 10 feet; h = 30 feet
C. r = 15 feet; h = 45 feet
D. r = 20 feet; h = 60 feet
19. Solve the inequality x − 5 > x – 2.
A. x > 3
B. x > 6
C. x > 9
D. x > 12
20. Which of the following angle measurements would not describe
an interior angle of a right angle?
A. 30°
B. 60°
93

C. 90°
D. 100°
21. Solve this quadratic equation: 24x2 = 3(43x − 15).
A. x = and x = 6
B. x = and x = -5
C. x = 3 and x =
D. x = and x = 5

22. A 20 ft. beam leans against a wall. The beam reaches the wall
13.9 ft. above the ground. What is the measure of the angle formed
by the beam and the ground?
A. 44°
B. 35°
C. 55°
D. 46°
23. The lines y = 2x and 2y = - x are
A. parallel

B. perpendicular

C. horizontal

D. vertical

24. The inequality corresponding to the statement:"the price is no
less than 100 Dollars" is
A. x < 100

B. x ≥ 100

C. x ≤ 100

94

D. x > 100

25. Which of these points DOES NOT lie on the graph of y = -x +
3?
A. (9,- 6)

B. (3,0)

C. (-2,5)

D. (2,2)

26. Which of these relations DOES NOT represent a function?
A. {(2,3),(-4,3),(7,3)}
B. {(0,0),(-1,-1),(2,2)}
C. {(2,3),(-5,3),(2,7)}

D. {(-1,3),(-5,3),(-9,0)}

27. Which property is used to write:3(x y) = (3 x)y?
A. Commutative property of
multiplication

B. Multiplicative inverse property

C. Distributive propery

D. Associative property of
multiplication

28. Which of these values of x satisfies the inequality -7x + 6 ≤ -8
A. -2

B. 0

C. -7

D. 2

29. The equation |-2x - 5| - 3 = k has no solution if k =
A. -5

B. -3

C. 7

D. 0

30. What is the slope of the line perpendicular to the line y = -5x +
9?
A. 5

B. -5

C. 1/5

D. -1/5

31. If x > 0, which of the following must always be true?
I.
<x
II. x2 > x
III. x2 >
95

A. I only
B. II only
C. III only
D. none of these
32. Find the value of k such that the quadratic equation 4x2 + 7x + 3
= 2k have equal roots.
A.
B. C.
D. -

33. What is the slope of the line containing (0,1) and (6,8)?
A.
B.
C.
D. 2
34. Three concentric circles whose radii are in the ratio 2:3:5. If the
area of the smallest circle is 36 , what would be the area of the
largest circle?
A. 75
B. 81
C. 100
D. 225
35. If a = 3c − 4 and b = 2(3 − c) what is 3b expressed in terms
of a?
A. 10 – 2a
B. 5 – 2a
96

C. 10 - a
D. 5 - a
36. Which of the following cannot yield an odd integer when divided
by 10?
A. The sum of two odd integers.
B. The product of two prime numbers.
C. The product of two odd integers.
D. The sum of three consecutive integers.
37. The value of 2-|-2| is
A. 4

B. 0.25

C. -4

D. -0.25

38. If f(x) = 4x3 - 4x2 + 10, then f(-2) =
A. 26

B. -38

C. 10

D. 38

39. In which quadrant do the lines x = 3 and y = -4 intersect?
A. I

40. Simplify: +

B. II

C. III

-

A.
B.
C.
D.

97

D. IV

41. Subtract and simplify:

-

A.
B.
C.
D.

42. Multiply and simplify:
A. 2x
B. 5
C. 4x
D. 6

x

43. Divide and simplify:
A. x + 2
B. 2
C.

÷ (x - 2)

D.

44. Solve the inequality 3(1 − 3x) ≥ −3 (x + 27)
A. 3 ≥ x
B. 7
C. 14x
D. 14 ≥ x
45. Simplify the equation (3xy5)2 – 11x2y2(4y4)2
A. 176x2y10
B. -176x2y10
C. -167x2y10
D. 167x2y10
98

46. Factor the following polynomial: v4 − 13v2 – 48
A. v4 − 13v2 − 48 = (v2 + 3)(v + 4)(v − 4)
B. v4 + 13v2 − 48 = (v2 + 3)(v + 4)(v − 4).
C. (v + 4) = v2 − 4v + 4v − 16 = v2 – 16
D. (v − 4) = v2 − 4v + 4v − 16 = v2 – 16

47. Simplify the following radical expression: (9
A. 18ab2
B. 9ab
C. a2b
D. 27a2b
48. Which choice below has the most points?
A. a line
B. a line segment
C. a ray
D. No determination can be made.
49. Lines are always
A. solid.
B. finite.
C. noncollinear.
D. straight.
50. Collinear points
A. determine a plane.
B. are circular.
C. are noncoplanar.
D. are coplanar.

99

)(3a

)

51. The shortest distance between any two points is
A. a plane.
B. a line segment.
C. a ray.
D. an arch.
52. Which of the following decribes the values of x for which 16 – x2
≥ 0?
A. x ≤ - 4 or x ≥ 4
B. -4 ≤ x ≤ 4
C. 0 ≤ x ≤ 4
D. x ≥ 0

53. Find the area of the rectangle below.
3

A.
B.
C.
D.

54. If 16x + 8y represents the perimeter of a rectangle, and 5x – 2y
represents its width, then its length is represented by the
expression
A. 3x + 2y
B. 3x + 6y
C. 11x + 6y
D. 21x + 6y
100

55. A class contains 2 boys for every 1 girl. 75% of the boys have
taken Algebra 2, whereas 50% of the girls have taken Algebra 2.
What is the ratio of boys who have taken Algebra 2 to girls who
have taken Algebra 2?
A. 2 : 1
B. 2 : 2
C. 3 : 1
D. 3 : 2
56. A patient must take his medication every 7 hours starting at
7:00 A.M., Sunday. On what day will the patient first receive his
medication at 6 P.M.?
A. Monday
B. Tuesday
C. Wednesday
D. Thursday
57. Tommy had a bag containing colored marbles. The colors are
red, green, and white. There are thrice as many green marbles as
red marbles and twice as many white marbles as green marbles. If
a marble is drawn from the bag, what is the probability of getting a
white marble?
A.
B.
C.
D.

58. Find the values of k for which the equation
two real roots.
A. k = 2
B. -2 < k < 2
101

- kx + k = 0 has

C. k < - 2 or k > 2
D. – 2 ≤ k ≤ 2
59. A company’s profits increased by 12% from 2010 to 2011 and
by 18% from 2011 to 2012. By what percent did the company’s
profits increase from 2010 to 2012?
A. 37%
B. 54%
C. 12%
D. 32%
60. Solve for x: 92x + 5 = 81x + 1
A. - 4
B. 4
C. 1
D. no solution
61. What is the average of the solution set of the inequality |−2x +
4| < 6?
A. -2
B. -3
C. 2
D. 3
Answer questions number 62 to 66 using the description
below.
Ann, Bill, Carl, and Dan work in the same office building. Dan works
in the basement while Ann, Bill, and Carl share an office on level X.
At any given moment of the day, they are all typing at their desks.
Bill likes a window seat; Ann likes to be near the bathroom; and
Carl prefers a seat next to the door. Their three cubicles do not line
up.
62. Level X can also be called
102

A. Plane Ann, Bill, and Carl.
B. Plane Ann and Bill.
C. Plane Dan.
D. Plane Carl, X, and Bill.
63. If level X represents a plane, then level X has
A. no points.
B. only three points.
C. a finite set of points.
D. an infinite set of points extending infinitely.
64. If Ann and Bill represent points, then Point Ann
A. has depth and length, but no width; and is noncollinear with point
Bill.
B. has depth, but no length and width; and is noncollinear with point
Bill.
C. has depth, but no length and width; and is collinear with point
Bill.
D. has no depth, length, and width; and is collinear with point Bill.
65. If Ann, Bill, and Carl represent points, then Points Ann, Bill, and
Carl are
A. collinear and noncoplanar.
B. noncollinear and coplanar.
C. noncollinear and noncoplanar.
D. collinear and coplanar.
66. A line segment drawn between Carl and Dan is
A. collinear and noncoplanar.
B. noncollinear and coplanar.
C. noncollinear and noncoplanar.
D. collinear and coplanar.

103

67. Which term of the arithmetic sequence 2, 5, 8... is equal to
227?
A. 74th term
B. 75th term
C. 76th term
D. 77th term
68. How many consecutive odd integers of an arithmetic sequence,
starting from 9, must be added in order to obtain a sum of 15,860?
A. 119
B. 120
C. 121
D. 122
69. The semicircle of area 1250 pi centimeters is inscribed inside a
rectangle. The diameter of the semicircle coincides with the length
of the rectangle. Find the area of the rectangle.
A. 1500
B. 5000
C. 4500
D. 2500
70. Which of these numbers cannot be a probability?
A. -0.00001
B. 0.5
C. 0
D. 1
71. The blood groups of 200 people is distributed as follows: 50
have type A blood, 65 have B blood type, 70 have O blood type
and 15 have type AB blood. If a person from this group is selected
at random, what is the probability that this person has O blood
type?
A. 1
104

B. 0.5
C. 0.35
D. 0.45
72. A number, x, is decreased by 40% then increased by 25%.
What is the final result in terms of x?
A. 0.55x
B. 0.65x
C. 0.7x
D. 0.75x
73. The expression (x + y) [z − (x − y)] is equivalent to which of the
following?
A. xz – x2 + 2xy + y2
B. xz – x2 + yz + y2
C. xyz + y2 − xy + yz + y2
D. xz + x2 − yz – y2
74. There are 32 marbles in a jar: 14 blue, 10 red, 5 green, and 3
yellow. Sally pulls one marble, randomly, from the jar. Without
replacing the marble, she pulls another marble. What is the
probability that both marbles will be red?
A.
B.
C.
D.

75. If x + y = 7 andn x – y = 3, what is x2 – y2 = ?
A. 4
B. 21
C. 25
D. 36
105

76. The circumference of a large wedding cake is 60 inches. If the
cake is divided evenly into 12 slices, what is the length of the arc, in
inches, made by 5 combined slices?
A. 10
B. 15
C. 20
D. 25
77. If ƒ(x) = x2 + 2x + 2, what is ƒ(x + h)?
A. x2 + 2x + 2xh + 2h + h2 + 2
B. 2x2 + 4hx + h2 − 2x − 2h
C. x + h2 + 2xh + 2 + h
D. x2 + 4xh + 4h2 + 2x

78. In the figure below, lines d and f are parallel and the angle
measures are as given. What is the value of x?

A. 35
B. 60
C. 85
D. 100
106

79. Which of the following represents the equation of the line that
passes through the point (2, 3) with a slope of −⅓?
A. y = 2x + 4
B. y = 4x + 2
C. y = - x +
D. y = -3x +

80. What is the sum of the x and y coordinates of the midpoint
between the points (−2, 9) and (10, −4)?
A. 3.5
B. 5
C. 6.5
D. 7.5
81. A group of 6 students are going to have a vote to determine
who should be President, Vice President, Secretary, and Treasurer
with only 1 person per job. How many different groups can be
formed from the 6 students?
A. 100
B. 250
C. 180
D. 360
82. In the figure below, A, C, D, and E are collinear; B, C, and F are
collinear; and the angles at B, D, and F are right angles, as marked.
Which of the following statements is NOT justifiable from the given
information?

107

A. AB is parallel to EF.
B. BC is congruent to CF.
C. EF is perpendicular to BF.
D. Triangle BAC is similar to triangle DCF.
83. A triangle is composed of angles represented as: 3x + 10, −2x +
40, and x + 40. What is the value of x?
A. 45
B. 50
C. 55
D. 60
84. If the number 89.8756 is rounded to the nearest hundredth,
what will be the sum of the tenths and hundredths place of the
resulting number?
A. 12
B. 14
C. 16
D. 20

108

85. The sum of 4 consecutive even integers is 36, what is the 3rd
largest integer in the set?
A. 6
B. 8
C. 10
D. 12
86. A company will be using a pie chart to represent the total
expenditures of its various departments. If the breakdown of its
expenditures is as follows: 19% Research and Development, 33%
Marketing, 22% Payroll. If the remaining expenditures represent
$12,250, what is the dollar amount spent on Research and
Development (Round to nearest unit)?
A. 8952
B. 7488
C. 8289
D. 5690
87. Solve for x: log 16x = log81
A. 0
B. 3
C. 16
D. 20
88. The diameter of a sphere measures 5 inches. If a cube is
inscribed inside the sphere, sharing its diagonal with the sphere’s
diameter, what is the side length of the cube?
A. 5
in.
B.

in.

C.

in.

D. 3

in.

109

89. Find the sum of the series 91 + 85 + 79 + 73 + … + (-29).
A. 144
B. - 144
C. 651
D. – 651

90. What is the median of the first 100 non-negative integers?
A. 49
B. 49.5
C. 50
D. 50.5
91. What are the x-intercepts of the function ƒ(x) = x³ + 3x² − x − 3
?
A. -3, -1, 1
B. -3, 0, 1
C. 0, 3
D. -3, 0
92. How many different ways can five students be seated in a
round table?
A. 5
B. 10
C. 24
D. 25
93. If the ratio of milk cartons to juice boxes is 13:x and there are
39 milk cartons and 18 juice boxes, what is the value of x?
A. 4
B. 6
C. 8
D. 12
110

94. Give the simplest form of
A. 0
B. 1
C. - 1
D. tan
95. If a = −1 and b = 4, what is the difference between a3b +
3b and a3b + 3b0?
A. 5
B. -3
C. 9
D. 6
96. 4xyz * 2x2y2 * z3 * y2 * z
The equation above is equivalent to which of the following?
A. xy3z3
B.

x3y5z5

C. x2y2z2
D. x4y2z2

97. What the ratio of the perimeters of two similar polygon if the
ratio of their areas is 64 : 729?
A. 2 : 3
B. 4 : 9
C. 8 : 27
D. 16 : 81

111

98. If the average of a and b equals the average of a, b, and c then
express c in terms of a and b.
A. a + b
B. 2 (a + b)
C.
D.

99. Rita is selling concert tickets. She sold 4 to her cousins, then
gave half of what she had left to her brother for him to sell. She sold
twelve more to her friends and had 15 tickets left to sell. How many
tickets did she have in all?
A. 57
B. 58
C. 59
D. 60
100. Jane had only
candies after giving some of them to her
playmates. She gave one-sixth to Catherine, two-fifths to Farah,
and pieces to Wendy. How many candies did Jane originally
have?
A.
B.
C.
D.

112

5
Reading Comprehension
Directions: Read the paragraph/passage. Then read the questions
that follow it. Choose the letter that corresponds to your answer.
For questions 1 – 7:
“The Witness Tree”
A Story from Kazakhstan
Two men came before a judge in his court. “Give me justice! My
neighbor has robbed me!” said one man.
“He’s lying,” the other protested. “I’ve done nothing wrong.” “Let me
hear what you both have to say,” the judge said.
The first man began. “A while ago I went on a journey. I left my life
savings – a pot of gold coins – with my neighbor, he promised to
guard the money while I was away. When I returned, he denied that
he had ever seen my gold coins. He says I gave him nothing!”
“My neighbor is lying!” the second man said. “I know nothing about
any pot of gold coins. He never gave me anything!”
“Before you left, did you tell anyone about leaving the coins with
your neighbor? Did anyone see you give them to him?” the judge
asked the first man.
113

The man replied, “For secrecy, I told no one. No one saw us
because I asked my neighbor to meet me at night by a tree in the
forest. There, in the dark, I gave him the coins.”
The judge frowned. “It is best to have a human witness. Since there
is none, we will have to ask the tree. Go to the forest. Ask the tree if
it saw you give a pot of coins to your neighbor. My clerk will go with
you to write down the tree’s testimony.”
The man and the clerk set off for the forest. Meanwhile, the judge
invited the neighbor to sit down.
After a while he asked the neighbor, “Do you think they’ve reached
the tree yet?” The neighbor shook his head. “Not yet.”
Time passed. The judge asked again, “Do you think they’re there
now?” “No, not yet,” the neighbor answered.
More time passed. The judge asked again, “Shouldn’t they be there
by now?” The neighbor nodded. “Yes, they’re probably there.”
“Oh?” said the judge. “Didn’t you say your neighbor never gave you
anything? How do you know where he’s going? How do you know
how long it would take to arrive there if you’ve never been there?
Bring back the gold you stole, or you’ll be in serious trouble.”
When the first man returned, the judge gave back his missing
money.
“What did the tree say?” the judge asked. “Nothing!” the bewildered
man replied. “But it revealed the truth anyway,” said the judge.
1. What was the man asked to do with his neighbor’s money?
A. Protect it
B. Bury it
C. Spend it
D. Divide it up
114

2. The judge invited the neighbor to sit and wait because the judge
–
A. knew the man was tired
B. wanted to find out where the tree was
C. had a plan to discover the truth
D. wanted to talk to someone
3. People like the judge in this story can be described as –
A. dishonest
B. shrewd
C. generous
D. proud
4. The story tells the reader –
A. how the neighbor was punished
B. why the man had trusted his neighbor
C. which man was lying
D. how far the man and the clerk walked
5. A clue to predicting the outcome of the story occurs when the –
A. neighbor denies that he robbed the fi rst man
B. judge is asked to settle the matter
C. clerk goes with the man who was robbed
D. judge says, “Oh?”
6. Why would the robber assume that no one would find out his
secret?
A. He thought that the judge was dishonest.
B. He thought that he was smarter than the judge.
C. He thought his neighbor would not be able to find the tree.
D. He knew that trees cannot talk.

115

7. This story was probably told in order to –
A. share a true experience
B. help the reader settle disagreements
C. help the reader become rich
D. teach a lesson

For questions 8 – 12:
Julia Morgan was born in 1872 and grew up in Oakland, California.
At a time when it was uncommon for women to pursue higher
education and full-time careers, she became one of the most
successful and well-known architects in the United States.
As a child and teenager, Morgan spent most of her time in
California, but she also made several trips to New York to visit her
extended family. She became close with an older cousin and her
cousin’s husband, Pierre LeBrun, who was an architect in New
York City. Sensing Morgan’s fascination with engineering and
design, LeBrun and his wife encouraged Morgan to continue her
education. While most young women her age were planning large
parties to celebrate their entrance into society, Morgan asked her
parents if she could attend college instead. Impressed with their
daughter’s ambition, they agreed, and Morgan enrolled at the
University of California in Berkeley to study civil engineering.
Morgan was the only woman in her engineering program, and she
excelled in her classes. She dreamed of a career in architecture
and decided to apply to the Paris School of Fine Arts to continue
her studies. Though it took her several years to gain acceptance to
this competitive school, she never stopped trying. She was
eventually admitted and quickly became successful at the
institution. In fact, she graduated with her architecture degree in
three years instead of the usual five.
Morgan then returned home to California and began her career as
an architect in a large design firm. Among her many well-known
clients was newspaper publisher William Randolph Hearst. He
116

hired Morgan to design several buildings, including his largest
estate, Hearst Castle. During these years, Morgan developed her
signature architectural style. She designed buildings using a variety
of historic techniques while ensuring that they remained true to their
Californian roots. She loved using redwood from Northern
California and incorporating local pottery and ceramics into her
designs.
Working for Hearst helped Morgan make a name for herself, and
she soon had enough clients to open her own architectural practice.
Her services were in high demand following the San Francisco
earthquake of 1906. Thanks to her training as an engineer, Morgan
understood how to construct buildings that could resist forceful
movement in the event of another earthquake. She provided her
services to many wealthy clients during these years.
But the projects dearest to Morgan’s heart were those that
promoted the education of women. She designed a series of
buildings for the YWCA, an organization that provided classes and
gathering spaces for young women. She also oversaw the master
plan of Mills College, a women’s college outside of her hometown
of Oakland, and contributed six buildings to its campus.
8. Which sentence BEST states the main idea of the text?
A. Although it was unusual for the time, Julia Morgan attended a
university and then became a successful architect.
B. Julia Morgan began her career in a large design firm and had
many well-known clients.
C. Julia Morgan’s early journeys to New York and Paris helped her
develop a lifelong love of travel.
D. Through her work with the YWCA, Julia Morgan showed her
commitment to the education of young women.
9. Why does the author write, “In fact, she graduated with her
architecture degree in three years instead of the usual five” in
paragraph 3?
117

A. to give an example of how quickly Morgan could design buildings
B. to help explain why people wanted to hire Morgan as an
architect
C. to support the statement that Morgan was a strong student
D. to help illustrate Morgan’s desire to return to California
10. What does the word “they” refer to in paragraph 4?
A. years
B. buildings
C. techniques
D. roots
11. What phrase is closest in meaning to make a name for herself
in paragraph 5?
A. grow closer to her family
B. focus on her strengths
C. explore new interests
D. become well known
12. Why does the author begin paragraph 6 with the word “But”?
A. to build suspense around an important moment in Morgan’s
career
B. to show how people’s views of Morgan’s work have changed
over time
C. to contrast two areas of Morgan’s architectural work
D. to introduce an unexpected effect of one of Morgan’s projects
For questions 13 – 18:
As Jay walked toward the beach that beautiful morning, the sun
sparkled across the blue water, and the sand already felt warm
under his toes. There was a slight breeze, but even in shorts and a
T-shirt, Jay didn’t feel the least bit cold. Yet despite the gorgeous
scenery and the perfect temperature, Jay couldn’t help feeling a bit
118

disappointed. After all, it was December, and as far as Jay was
concerned, this was not how December should feel.
It had been over six months since Jay’s family had relocated from
their small mountain town in Colorado to this bustling beach
community in southern California. It had been a time of
adjustments: a new neighborhood, a new school, and new friends.
Surprisingly, Jay had adapted far better than he would have
expected. The one thing he had not been able to get used to was
the seasons here. He still missed the mild spring, the hot summer,
the crisp fall, and especially the cold winter of Colorado.
For Jay, winter had always been the perfect season. He enjoyed
hearing boots crunch on fresh snow and drinking a mug of hot
chocolate when it was freezing outside. Then, there was sledding,
Jay’s favorite winter activity. He’d eagerly climb to the top of the hill.
Then, sitting on his wooden sled, he’d push off with his feet, flying
downhill, steering with the rope, and grinning as he glided through
the icy snow. Recently, his friends had been sending pictures of
their sledding exploits. Jay couldn’t help feeling jealous. Living in
this mild climate just wasn’t the same.
In an attempt to persuade Jay that beach life wasn’t all bad, his
friend Miguel invited Jay to his first surfing lesson. Miguel was
already waiting, standing next to two large surfboards and wearing
a wet suit.
“So, you miss the cold?” Miguel smiled, greeting Jay. “Well, around
here, nothing compares to a surf in the Pacific.” He tossed a wet
suit at Jay. “Better put this on.”
As Jay pulled on the wet suit, Miguel quickly went over some basic
surfing techniques, clearly eager to get straight into the water. Jay
scrambled after him.
The first time an ocean wave hit Jay, it completely took his breath
away. By the time he was waist-deep, he could barely feel his toes.
His cold fingers struggled to grip the surfboard as he pulled himself
119

on top. As another wave crashed over him, he could hardly hear
Miguel shouting directions to him. Paddling with his arms, he turned
toward shore as a giant wave approached. Suddenly, he felt the
surfboard being lifted by the wave, and he was flying toward the
beach. He held on tight, forgetting Miguel’s instructions about how
to stand. Soon, Jay heard a crunch as his board hit the shore, and
he slid off onto the sand.
Although it had been a short ride, Jay felt a rush of excitement. The
biting cold, the sudden speed, the struggle for control; for a
moment, it had felt a lot like sledding, but even better.
Then, Miguel was standing over him, looking amused.
“Hey are you okay?” he asked. “Anytime you want to stop, we can
go back to my house and have a hot chocolate. It’s the best way to
warm up.”
“No. I want to give it another try!” Jay sputtered, smiling. Maybe he
could learn to like it here after all.
13. What is the story mainly about?
A. playing a team sport
B. visiting an old friend
C. adjusting to a new place
D. learning to swim in the ocean
14. Which of the following is Jay’s favorite thing about winter?
A. the cold temperature
B. the sound of the snow
C. drinking hot chocolate
D. sledding with his friends
15. What does exploits MOST LIKELY mean in paragraph 3?
A. slopes
B. trips
120

C. adventures
D. partners
16. What does went over MOST LIKELY mean as it is used in
paragraph 6?
A. crossed
B. explained
C. passed by
D. read through
17. What is probably true about Jay’s first surfing experience?
A. It was too cold for him.
B. It was too difficult for him.
C. It was just as he had expected it to be.
D. It was more enjoyable than sledding.
18. What is the BEST title for the story?
A. Going Home
B. A Surprising Day
C. The Best Vacation
D. Summers at the Beach

For questions 19 – 23:
“Fortune Tellers”
A young couple entered the restaurant in Andy’s view. They were
holding hands. Andy sat back down in his chair. He felt sick. He
turned and faced his father, who was eating xôi.
“What’s the matter, son?” asked his father. “I thought you were
going to the birthday party.”
121

“It’s too late.”
“Are you sure?”
Andy nodded. He looked at the plate of xôi. He wanted to bury his
face in it.
“Hi, Andy.” A voice came from behind.
Andy looked up. He recognized the beautiful face, and he refused
to meet her eyes. “Hi, Jennifer,” muttered Andy, looking at the floor.
“You didn’t miss much, Andy. The party was dead. I was looking for
you, hoping you could give me a ride home. Then I met Tim, and he
was bored like me. And he said he’d take me home…. Andy, do
you want to eat with us? I’ll introduce you to Tim.”
Andy said, “No, I’m eating xôi with my father.”
“Well, I’ll see you in school then, okay?”
“Yeah.” And Andy watched her socks move away from his view.
Andy grabbed a chunk of xôi. The rice and beans stuck to his
fingernails. He placed the chunk in his mouth and pulled it away
from his fingers with his teeth. There was a dry bitter taste. But
nothing could be as bitter as he was, so he chewed some more.
The bitterness faded as the xôi became softer in his mouth, but it
was still tasteless. He could hear the young couple talk and giggle.
Their words and laughter and the sounds of his own chewing mixed
into a sticky mess. The words were bitter and the laughter was
tasteless, and once he began to understand this, he tasted the
sweetness of xôi. Andy enjoyed swallowing the sticky mess down.
Andy swallowed everything down— sweetness and bitterness and
nothingness and what he thought was love.
Adapted from Nguyen Duc Minh, “Fortune Tellers.” in the collection
American Eyes.©1994 by H. Holt
122

19. Who is telling this story?
A. Jennifer
B. Andy
C. Tim
D. An unnamed narrator
20. What is the most reasonable conclusion to make from the
statement in the first paragraph, “He felt sick.”?
A. Eating xoi with his father gave Andy a stomachache.
B. Andy was upset when he saw Jennifer holding hands with Tim.
C. Andy was unhappy about the restaurant his father had selected.
D. Andy was upset with Jennifer for making him miss the party.
21. According to the passage, Tim would most likely describe the
party as:
A. mysterious.
B. lively.
C. dull.
D. upsetting.
22. Based on the last paragraph, it can be most reasonably inferred
that Andy’s increasing enjoyment of eating xôi was related to:
A. hearing Tim and Jennifer laughing and talking.
B. the fact that it stuck to his fingernails.
C. sitting at a table with Tim and Jennifer while he ate.
D. the fact that his father made the xôi.
23. This passage is mainly about the relationship between:
A. Andy and his father.
B. Andy and Tim.
C. Andy’s father and Tim.
D. Jennifer and Andy
123

For questions 24 – 31:
In the 1930s, why did author Zora Neale Hurston choose Eatonville,
Florida, to be the first source for her collection of folklore?
I was glad when somebody told me, “You may go and collect
Negro folklore.” In a way, it would not be a new experience for me.
When I pitched headforemost into the world I landed in the crib of
Negroism. It was fitting me like a tight chemise. I couldn't see it for
wearing it. It was only when I was off in college, away from my
native surroundings, that I could stand off and look at my garment.
Then I had to have the spy-glass of anthropology to look through.
I was asked where I wanted to work and I said, “Florida. It’s
a place that draws people—Negroes from every Southern state and
some from the North and West.” So I knew that it was possible for
me to get a cross section of the Negro South in one state. And then
I realized that I felt new myself, so it looked sensible for me to
choose familiar ground.
I started in Eatonville, Florida, because I knew that the town
was full of material and that I could get it without causing any hurt
or harm. As early as I could remember, it was the habit of the men
particularly to gather on the store porch in the evenings and swap
stories. Even the women would stop and break a breath with them
at times. As a child when I was sent down to the store, I'd drag out
my leaving to hear more.
Folklore is not as easy to collect as it sounds. The ideal
source is where there are the fewest outside influences, but these
people are reluctant at times to reveal that which the soul lives by. I
knew that even I would have some hindrance among strangers. But
here in Eatonville I knew everybody was going to help me.

124

Adapted from Zora Neale Hurston, Mules and Men. ©1935 by J.B.
Lippincott Company.
24. Which of the following does the author use as a metaphor for
the culture in which she was born?
A. College
B. Garment
C. Southern state
D. Spy-glass

25. Based on the first paragraph, it is most reasonable to conclude
that while in college the author:
A. decided to become a professor of anthropology.
B. decided that she did not want to live permanently in Eatonville,
Florida.
C. felt that her teachers prevented her from studying what she
wanted.
D. understood her own culture in new and different ways.
26. As it is used in the passage, the highlighted word material most
nearly means:
A. diversity.
B. fabric.
C. information.
D. money.
27. In the second paragraph, the author indicates that one reason
she chose to work in Florida was that she wanted to collect folklore:
A. from people of different geographical backgrounds.
B. where her teachers suggested she do so.
C. from a place she had never visited.
D. in a state far from where she grew up.
125

28. In the first paragraph, the author’s claim, “In a way, it would not
be a new experience for me," refers to the fact that:
A. she had already attended college in Florida.
B. she had already collected folklore in Florida for a college course.
C. she had already experienced new cultures by leaving home.
D. she was already familiar with the folklore she was to collect.
29. Based on information in the third paragraph, which of the
following statements about the interactions on the porch can be
most reasonably inferred?
A. The adults encouraged the author (as a child) to stay and tell
stories.
B. Men were more frequent participants than were women.
C. Most of the storytellers had not grown up in Eatonville.
D. The author's parents sent her to the porch to hear the stories. E.
One man in particular told most of the stories.
30. In the last paragraph, the author writes that folklore collecting:
A. is less difficult than it appears.
B. is easiest to accomplish in isolated places because people there
freely reveal their innermost thoughts.
C. can be difficult in isolated places, even though the people there
are the best sources.
D. is more difficult than publishing what has been collected.
31. Which of the following is NOT among the reasons the author
gives for her decision to collect folklore in Eatonville?
A. The people of Eatonville would be grateful that she published
their stories.
B. The people of Eatonville would have many stories for her
collection.
C. Eatonville and its people are familiar to her.
D. She believes that she can collect stories without doing harm
126

For questions 32 – 35:
“What Methods Do Andean Farmers Use?”
Public debate around climate change and its effects on
agriculture tends to focus on the large-scale industrial farms of the
North. Farmers who work on a small scale and use traditional
methods have largely been ignored. However, as the world slowly
comes to terms with the threat of climate change, Native farming
traditions will warrant greater attention.
In the industrial model of agriculture, one or two crop
varieties are grown over vast areas. Instead of trying to use local
resources of soil and water optimally and sustainably, the natural
environment is all but ignored and uniform growing conditions are
fabricated through large-scale irrigation and the intensive use of
artificial fertilizers and pesticides. For example, a handful of
basically similar potato varieties, all of which require nearly identical
soil conditions, temperature, rainfall, and growing seasons, account
for almost all global production. When these global crops are no
longer suited to the environment in which they are grown, when
their resistance to disease and pests begins to fail, or the climate
itself changes, the best way to rejuvenate the breeding stock will be
to introduce new genetic material from the vast diversity of crop
varieties still maintained by indigenous peoples.
In contrast to the industrial model, Andean potatoes and
other Andean crops such as squash and beans grown by
Quechuan farmers exhibit extraordinary genetic diversity, driven by
the need to adapt crops to the extraordinary climatic diversity of the
region. Along the two axes of latitude and altitude, the Andes
encompasses fully two-thirds of all possible combinations of climate
and geography found on Earth. The Andean potato has been
adapted to every environment except the depth of the rainforest or
the frozen peaks of the mountains. Today, facing the likelihood of
major disruptions to the climatic conditions for agriculture
worldwide, indigenous farmers provide a dramatic example of crop
127

adaptation in an increasingly extreme environment. More
importantly, Native farmers have also safeguarded the crop
diversity essential for the future adaptations.
Adapted from Craig Benjamin, “The Machu Picchu Model: Climate
Change and Agricultural Diversity.” © 1999 by Craig Benjamin.
32. What is the main idea of the first paragraph?
A. Attention to Native farming practices will lead to greater
awareness of the threat of climate change.
B. Popularity of small-scale farming in the North will lead to greater
attention to Native farming practices.
C. Global demand for food will lead to increasing efficiency of largescale farming in the North.
D. It will be worthwhile to include a greater focus on Native farming
practices in public discussions concerning the threat of climate
change.
33. In the second paragraph, the information about potato-growing
practices in the industrial model of agriculture serves to:
A. give an example of a potential problem that Native farming
practices could help to alleviate.
B. show the likely global consequences of a possible food shortage
caused by industrial farming practices.
C. show how pests and disease are less effectively resisted by
crops grown in the industrial farming model.
D. give an example of how public debate has had little effect on the
agricultural practices of the North
34. The passage states that which of the following is true of the
small number of potato varieties that account for most of the
potatoes produced on Earth currently?
A. They are grown in the Andean region.
B. They all require very similar soil and climate conditions.
C. They are no longer suited to their environment.
128

D. They are based on genetic material from crops developed by
indigenous peoples
35. As it is used in the passage, the underlined word fabricated
most nearly means:
A. woven.
B. falsely stated.
C. fully clothed.
D. manufactured.
For questions 36 – 45:
The following passage is adapted from John F. Kennedy’s
Inaugural address delivered Friday, January 20, 1961.
So let us begin a new remembering on both sides that civility is not
a sign of weakness, and sincerity is always subject to proof. Let us
never negotiate out of fear. But let us never fear to negotiate. And if
a beachhead of cooperation may push back the jungle of suspicion,
let both sides join in creating a new endeavor, not a new balance of
power, but a new world of law, where the strong are just and the
weak secure and the peace preserved.
All this will not be finished in the first one hundred days. Nor will it
be finished in the first one thousand days, nor in the life of this
Administration, nor even perhaps in our lifetime on this planet. But
let us begin.
In your hands, my fellow citizens, more than mine, will rest the final
success or failure of our course. Since this country was founded,
each generation of Americans has been summoned to give
testimony to its national loyalty. The graves of young Americans
who answered the call to service surround the globe.

129

Now the trumpet summons us again; not as a call to bear arms,
though arms we need; not as a call to battle, though embattled we
are; but a call to bear the burden of a long twilight struggle, year in
and year out, “rejoicing in hope, patient in tribulation”—a struggle
against the common enemies of man: tyranny, poverty, disease
and war itself. Can we forge against these enemies a grand and
global alliance, North and South, East and West, that can assure a
more fruitful life for all mankind? Will you join in that historic effort?
In the long history of the world, only a few generations have been
granted the role of defending freedom in its hour of maximum
danger. I do not shrink from this responsibility; I welcome it. I do not
believe that any of us would exchange places with any other people
or any other generation. The energy, the faith, the devotion which
we bring to this endeavor will light our country and all who serve
it—and the glow from that fire can truly light the world.
And so, my fellow Americans: ask not what your country can do for
you—ask what you can do for your country. My fellow citizens of
the world: ask not what America will do for you, but what together
we can do for the freedom of man.
Finally, whether you are citizens of America or citizens of the world,
ask of us here the same high standards of strength and sacrifice
which we ask of you. With a good conscience our only sure reward,
with history the final judge of our deeds, let us go forth to lead the
land we love, asking His blessing and His help, but knowing that
here on Earth God’s work must truly be our own.

36. The central idea that Kennedy expresses in the speech is
that Americans
A. are better off now than they have been in any other generation.
B. have lost their faith and should renew it.
C. are selfish and should do more for the benefit of mankind.
D. should defend freedom and fight tyranny.
130

37. Kennedy uses the metaphor of a “beachhead” and “jungle” in
the first paragraph mainly to
A. paint a visual presentation to entertain his audience.
B. emphasize the difficulty of the battle he wants people to fight in a
memorable way.
C. compare politics to ecology.
D. suggest that jungles are more prevalent than beaches.
38. The second paragraph serves mainly to
A. urge a call to arms.
B. set realistic expectations.
C. reveal criticism for the prior generation.
D. detail Kennedy’s own personal opinion.
39. In paragraph 4, “common” most nearly means
A. universal.
B. ordinary.
C. unimportant.
D. unnecessary.
40. The question marks that end the final sentences of paragraph 4
have primarily which effect?
A. They invite the readers to see themselves as active participants
in the fight against tyranny.
B. They are placed there to soften the message that Americans
cannot independently fight wars.
C. They allude to the idea that some questions, such as how
Americans should behave, have no concrete answers.
D. They help to criticize previous generations for leaving the work
of freedom unfinished.

131

41. According to Kennedy, which of the following is somewhat
unique to this generation of Americans?
A. The opportunity to defend their freedom by fighting abroad.
B. Their ability to have a clean conscience.
C. The opportunity to defend freedom at a time when it is most
severely threatened.
D. Their ability to fight tyranny.
42. Which choice provides the best evidence for the answer to the
previous question?
A. “Can we forge against these enemies a grand and global
alliance, North and South, East and West, that can assure a more
fruitful life for all mankind?” (Paragraph 4, Sentence 2)
B. “In the long history of the world, only a few generations have
been granted the role of defending freedom in its hour of maximum
danger.” (Paragraph 5, Sentence 1)
C. “I do not believe that any of us would exchange places with any
other people or any other generation” (Paragraph 5, Sentence 3)
D. “My fellow citizens of the world: ask not what America will do for
you, but what together we can do for the freedom of man.”
(Paragraph 6, Sentence 2)
43. In paragraph 6, the use of the phrase “my fellow Americans” is
likely intended to
A. unite the audience with Kennedy in a fight towards a common
goal.
B. recruit the audience to vote for Kennedy for president.
C. to highlight the differences between Kennedy and the audience.
D. encourage the audience to join the military to fight for freedom.

44. What idea does Kennedy mention in the final paragraph that is
not discussed elsewhere in the passage?
A. Citizenship
B. The world outside America
132

C. Religion
D. Justice
45. Overall, the tone of the passage can BEST be described as
A. logical and calculated.
B. emotional and esoteric.
C. desperate and intellectual.
D. moralistic and impassioned.

For questions 46 – 55:
The following passage is adapted from R. Smith’s “The
Organic Way of Life.”
Compared to the atmosphere, soil is a place where temperature
fluctuations are small and slow. Consequently, soil animals are
generally intolerant to sudden temperature changes and may not
function well over a very wide range. That’s why leaving bare earth
exposed to the hot summer sun often slows plant growth and why
many thoughtful composters either put down a thin mulch in
summer or try to rapidly establish a cooling leaf canopy to shade
raised beds. Except for a few microorganisms, soil animals breathe
oxygen just like other living things and so are dependent on an
adequate air supply. Where soil is airless due to compaction, poor
drainage, or large proportions of very fine clay, soil animals are few
in number.
The soil environment is generally quite moist, and even when the
soil seems dry the relative humidity of soil air usually approaches
100 percent. Soil animals consequently have not developed the
ability to conserve their body moisture and are speedily killed by dry
conditions. When faced with desiccation they retreat deeper into
the soil if there is oxygen and pore spaces large enough to move
about. So we see another reason why a thin mulch that preserves
133

surface moisture can greatly increase the beneficial population of
soil animals. Some single-cell animals and roundworms are
capable of surviving stress by encysting themselves, forming a little
“seed” that preserves their genetic material and enough food to
reactivate it, coming back to life when conditions improve. These
cysts may endure long periods of severe freezing and sometimes
temperatures of over 150 degree F.
Inhabitants of leaf litter reside close to the surface and so must be
able to experience exposure to dryer air and light for short times
without damage. These are called primary decomposers. They
spend most of their time chewing on the thick reserve of moist
leaves contacting the forest floor. Primary decomposers are unable
to digest the entire leaf. They extract only the easily-assimilated
substances from their food: proteins, sugars and other simple
carbohydrates and fats. Cellulose and lignin are the two substances
that make up the hard, permanent, and woody parts of plants;
these materials cannot be digested by most soil animals.
Interestingly, there are a few larvae whose digestive tract contains
cellulose-decomposing bacteria but these larvae have little overall
effect.
By the time the primary decomposers are finished, the leaves have
been mechanically disintegrated and thoroughly moistened, worked
over, chewed to tiny pieces and converted into minuscule bits of
moist excrement still containing active digestive enzymes. Many of
the bacteria and fungi that were present on the leaf surfaces have
passed through this initial digestion process alive or as spores
waiting and ready to activate. Digestive wastes of primary
decomposers are thoroughly inoculated with microorganisms that
can consume cellulose and lignin. Even though it looks broken
down, it has not yet fully decomposed. It does have a waterretentive, granular structure that facilitates the presence of air and
moisture throughout the mass creating perfect conditions for
microbial digestion to proceed. Both secondary and primary
decomposers are necessary to complete the composting process.
134

46. According to the passage, which of the following is true about
primary decomposers?
A. Most of them are unable to digest cellulose and lignin.
B. Most have a digestive tract that contains cellulose-decomposing
bacteria.
C. They can encyst themselves to protect against unfavorable
weather conditions.
D. They desiccate leaves, creating mulch.
47. Which choice provides the best evidence for the answer to the
previous question?
A. Paragraph 1, Sentences 1-3 (“Compared to the
atmosphere…shade raised beds.”).
B. Paragraph 2, Sentences 3-5 (“When faced with
desiccation…when conditions improve.”).
C. Paragraph 3, Sentences 4-6 (“Primary decomposers are…by
most soil animals.”).
D. Paragraph 4, Sentences 2-4 (“Many of the bacteria…yet fully
decomposed.”).
48. What can be inferred about the atmosphere as it is described in
paragraph 1?
A. Its inhabitants do not require as much moisture as creatures that
live in soil.
B. Changes in temperature can be abrupt.
C. It is not a habitat for primary decomposers.
D. Single-cell organisms cannot encyst in the atmosphere.
49. Which choice provides the best evidence for the answer to the
previous question?
A. Paragraph 1, Sentences 1–2 (“Compared to the atmosphere…a
very wide range.”).
B. Paragraph 1, Sentence 3 (“That’s why leaving…shade raised
beds.”).
135

C. Paragraph 1, Sentence 4 (“Except for a few…adequate air
supply.”).
D. Paragraph 1, Sentence 5 (“Where soil is…are few in number.”).
50. As used in paragraph 2, the word “encysting” most nearly
means
A. encroaching.
B. embellishing.
C. encrusting.
D. enclosing.
51. Which of the following is the function of the fourth paragraph?
A. To explain how soil animals thrive in certain temperatures and
humidity levels.
B. To validate the importance of both primary and secondary
decomposers in composting.
C. To provide a detailed summary of the composting process.
D. To explain how both primary and secondary decomposers aid
decomposition.
52. Which of the following can be inferred from the passage?
A. Primary decomposers can digest entire leaves, while secondary
decomposers cannot.
B. Composting requires only secondary decomposers.
C. Secondary decomposers cannot decompose proteins, sugars, or
fats.
D. Secondary decomposers come from the leaf surfaces.
53. Which choice provides the best evidence for the answer to the
previous question?
A. Paragraph 4, Sentence 1 (“By the time the…active digestive
enzymes.”).
B. Paragraph 4, Sentence 2 (“Many of the bacteria and…and ready
to activate.”).
136

C. Paragraph 4, Sentences 3-5 (“Digestive wastes of primary…not
yet fully decomposed.”).
D. Paragraph 4, Sentence 6 (Both secondary and…the composting
process.”).
54. Which of the following is NOT necessary for the composting
process?
A. Air
B. Heat
C. Primary decomposers
D. Secondary decomposers
55. The author is primarily concerned with
A. comparing the characteristics of two types of soil animals.
B. describing the habits of a class of soil-dwelling microorganisms.
C. reviewing the conditions required for an ecological process to
occur.
D. examining the environmental factors necessary for composting.
For questions 56 – 66:
Passage 1 is adapted from “The Snakes of Europe” by G.A.
Boulenger. Originally published in 1913. Passage 2 is adapted from
a recent guidebook for “How to Identify a Snake Species.”
Passage 1
When discussing coloration, we have first to distinguish between
the color and the markings. The former is very often highly variable
among snakes of the same species, to say nothing of the changes
which may take place with age or with the condition of the individual
snakes, whether before or after exuviation; it is not unusual to find
among specimens from the same locality a great range of variation,
from greyish-white to brown, or red, or black, as, for instance, in our
137

Common Viper. The latter afford more important characters, and
often furnish valuable indications for the distinction of species; but
even the disposition of the markings is subject to great individual
variations, more likely to mislead than to help the inexperienced
student in the discrimination of species.
It is therefore always advisable to resort in the first instance to
structural characters for the purpose of specific identification, and to
fall back on coloration only as a means of confirmation. If we were
to be guided by color and markings alone, how could we believe
that an adult four-lined Coluberquatuorlineatus is of the same
species as the handsomely spotted Colubersauromates. Yet, if we
compare the young of these two snakes we find them to be
absolutely identical in their markings, and, in the absence of any
structural differences, we are forced to conclude that they only
represent two forms of the same species, of which the latter is the
more primitive.
It is nevertheless a fact that, with a few exceptions, the markings,
however variable they may be, are reducible to certain fundamental
patterns to which the innumerable variations may be traced back,
and their derivation followed and scientifically explained. Let us
consider, for instance, another species of Coluber, highly variable
in its markings: C. leopardinus, of which the typical form, so called
from having been the first described and named, is not by any
means to be regarded as the most primitive.

Passage 2
Identifying snakes has little to do with the myths surrounding
poisonous and non-poisonous characteristics and has more to do
with body type classification. There are very few tricks that can be
used when determining the venom factor, one of which is pupil
shape. All snakes with slit-shaped pupils are poisonous. Not all
poisonous snakes have slit-shaped pupils. This one certainty is
often difficult to ascertain as it requires you to get extremely close
138

to the snake to make your determination. In reality, snake experts
use a methodical system to categorize and identify a snake once it
has been found.
The first characteristic assessed is body length. Snakes are
categorized into three classes: small, medium, and large. Once
length is determined, the width of the snake is also examined. If
possible, actual dimensions should be gathered. A snake’s head
shape can tell a lot about it, but does not necessarily mean
anything in regards to venomous or non-venomous. Many vipers
have triangular heads, but other snakes can resemble the same
shape when they deliberately flatten their heads in aggression or
anxiety. Knowing if the snake has a round, long, or oval head will
help in identification but is not any proof of venom or lack thereof.
Eye color, pupil shape, location on the face, and eye size should all
be noted. These three identifiers: body length and width, head
shape, and eye characteristics will narrow down the possibilities for
species identification.
Color is usually very helpful in determining the type of snake you
have located. Many snakes have distinctive patterns. Noting the
patterns and the colors is very important. Sometimes the difference
between a harmless snake and a deadly viper is one ring of
coloration. Blotches usually refer to patterns with no symmetry.
These markings are often rectangular with darker edges. If a
diamond pattern is noted, color and color pattern should be noted
as well. Are there speckles (flecks of color) or spots (large or small
defined, solid color circles)? Ring patterns appear like bands
around the width of the snake. Stripes are patterns lengthwise
down the body. Some snakes are one color on the dorsal side and
a different color on the belly. Distinctive markings on the head and
neck may be present. Lastly, some snakes have no markings at all
and are one, solid color.
Tail characteristics are another guide to identifying a snake. The tail
is defined as the length of body stretching beyond the snake’s
anus. Tails can end with a rattle. They can be pointed or rounded.
139

Some have specific patterns. Experts are able to use the number
and arrangement of scales on a snake to further assist in the
identification process. Some snakes are almost identical, and it is
these snakes that need the assistance of habitat evaluation. If a
snake cannot be identified by appearance alone, the habits of the
species will come into play. Some snakes like rocky soil. Some
snakes like sand. Some snakes eat only certain animals, or will
only be found out at certain times of day. Not all snakes are found
everywhere. Having a good, basic knowledge of the local area will
help tremendously.
The important thing to remember is that most “quick” identification
advice is based loosely on truth. You cannot always be certain of a
snake’s venom potential just by the shape of its head, the color of
its body, the habitat it lives in, or the color and shape of its eyes.

56. According to Passage 1, what is true about
Coluberquatuorlineatus and Colubersauromates?
A. They have identical markings.
B. The Coluberquatuorlineatus is unrelated to the
Colubersauromates.
C. The adult snakes do not resemble their young.
D. Colubersauromates evolved before Coluberquatuorlineatus.
57. Which choice provides the best evidence for the answer to the
previous question?
A. Paragraph 2, Sentence 1 (“It is … confirmation)
B. Paragraph 2, Sentence 3 (“Yet, if we…primitive.”)
C. Paragraph 3, Sentence 1 (“It is…explained.”)
D. Paragraph 3, Sentence 2 (“Let us consider…primitive.”)
58. In Passage 1, the author is primarily concerned with doing
which of the following?
A. Establishing a framework for additional discussion.
140

B. Pointing out features unique to a particular animal species.
C. Explaining evolutionary trends in snake color and markings.
D. Comparing the appearance of multiple species.
59. Which of the following inferences about snake coloring and
markings is most supported by Passage 1?
A. Coloring can be classified by a finite number of reducible
patterns.
B. Coloring can be as reliable an indicator of species as markings.
C. Two different species of snake will not have the same coloring
and markings.
D. Coloring sometimes helps distinguish snake species.
60. Which of the following best describes the relationship of the
statement about C. leopardinus in Passage 1 to the passage as a
whole?
A. It presents a hypothesis that disproves an earlier statement.
B. It offers an alternate interpretation of a previous idea.
C. It distills the broader point of the passage into a specific
example.
D. It answers an anticipated question that the reader might have
based on prior information.
61. Unlike Passage 1, Passage 2 emphasizes that which of the
following can be used to identify a snake species?
A. Color and tail characteristics.
B. Body markings and head shape.
C. Body length and markings.
D. Pupil shape and body width.
62. How are the authors of the passages different in their beliefs
regarding snake classification?

141

A. The first believes one method of classification is less valuable
than another form, while the second believes all forms of
classification are helpful.
B. The first does not believe that it is possible to identify two
separate species without looking at the markings, while the second
believes it is.
C. The first believes it is possible to determine whether a snake is
poisonous based on its physical characteristics, while the second
does not.
D. The first does not believe that variable markings can be
scientifically explained, while the second posits that they can be if
enough analysis is done on each specific snake.

63. As used in paragraph 3 of Passage 2, the word “dorsal” most
nearly means
A. anterior.
B. ventral.
C. back.
D. headmost.
64. According to Passage 2, how could it be determined that a
snake is poisonous by examining it?
A. If the snake’s body has specific markings.
B. If the snakes pupils are a specific shape.
C. If the snake’s tail has a specific shape.
D. It cannot generally be determined.
65. Both the author of Passage 1 and the author of Passage 2
would agree with which of the following statements?
A. It is relatively easy to categorize a snake if you can get close
enough to it.
B. Snakes can be easily categorized by the color of their skin and
the markings on their bodies.
142

C. Snake categorization may be more challenging than it first
appears.
D. Snake categorization should only be attempted by a scientific
professional with experience working with reptiles.
66. Which of the following most likely describes “habitat evaluation”
as mentioned in Passage 2?
A. Recording the climate, windfall, temperature, and humidity of the
area in which a snake has been found.
B. Recording the length, width, and weight of each individual snake
found in the habitat.
C. Recording the types of soil found in the area in which snakes
have been seen.
D. Recording the regular behavior of the snake in relation to its
environment.

For questions 67 – 71:
1

O that thou wert as my brother,
that sucked the breasts of my mother!
when I should find thee without,
I would kiss thee;
yea, I should not be despised.
2

I would lead thee,
and bring thee into my mother's house,
who would instruct me:
I would cause thee to drink of spiced wine of the juice of my
pomegranate.
6

Set me as a seal upon thine heart,
as a seal upon thine arm:
for love is strong as death;
jealousy is cruel as the grave:
the coals thereof are coals of fire,
143

which hath a most vehement flame.
7

Many waters cannot quench love,
neither can the floods drown it:
if a man would give all the substance of his house for love,
it would utterly be contemned.
67. Which of the following does not express the main
characteristic of love being conveyed in the passage?
A. Consuming
B. Eternal
C. Insatiable
D. Impassioned
68. Which of the following is a synonym of the word
vehement as used in the passage?
A. Agonizing
B. Violent
C. Imperturbable
D. Ardent
69. The word contemned in the last line is similar in meaning
with the following EXCEPT:
A. disdained
B. despised
C. condemned
D. wiped out
70. Which of the following can the passage be a metaphor
for?
A. Love and its possibility of violence
B. The negative tendencies of love
C. The love between a brother and a sister
D. The characteristic intensity of love
144

71. Who is the persona speaking in the passage?
A. The female beloved
B. The sister of the beloved
C. God
D. The male lover

For questions 72 – 76:

72. Ang paksa ng komiks ay ukol sa
A. paglalaro ng online games
B. paggamit ng mga social networking sites
C. kaalwanan ng gawain gamit ang internet
D. pamimili online
73. Ang mga karakter sa komiks ay mahihinuhang
A. nagsusuri ukol sa tulong ng internet sa tao
B. namamangha sa gamit ng internet
C. nanghihinayang sa pisikal na interaksyon sa tao
D. naiinis sa naibibigay ng internet sa lipunan
145

74. Masasabing ang pangyayari ay naganap sa
A. pamilihan.
B. isang bahay
C. paaralan
D. gitna ng kalsada.
75. Ayon sa komiks, ang lahat ng gawain ay
A. napapahirap at nagiging komplikado
B. naiiba at nawawalan ng katapatan
C. nagpapalayo ng damdamin ng mga tao
D. napapadali ngunit wala nang pisikal na interaksyon
76. Ang mga karakter sa komiks ay
A. nagsasagutan.
B. nanlilibak.
C. nagtatalakayan.
D. nagtatanungan.

For questions 77 – 81:
Isang Agila ang kasalukuyang lumilipad sa kalawakan, buong
yabang niyang iniladlad at ibinuka ang kanyang malalapad na
pakpak. Habang patuloy siya sa kanyang paglipad ay
nakasalubong niya ang isang maliit na ibong Maya at hinamon niya
ito.
"Hoy Maya, baka gusto mong subukan kung sino sa ating dalawa
ang mabilis lumipad?" buong kayabangan ni Agila, kaya naipasya
niyang tanggapin ang hamon nito para maturuan niya ng leksyon.
"Sige! Tinatanggap ko ang hamon mo. Kailan mo gustong
magsimula tayo?"
146

Natuwa ang Agila, hindi niya akalain na tatanggapin nito ang
hamon niya.
"Aba, nasa sa iyon 'yan. Kung kailan mo gusto," buong
kayabangang sagot ni Agila.
Napatingin ang Maya sa kalawakan. Nakita niyang nagdidilim ang
kalangitan, natitiyak niyang ang kasunod niyon ay malakas na pagulan.
"Sige Agila, gusto kong umpisahan na natin ang karera ngayon na.
Pero, para lalong maging masaya ang paligsahan natin ay
kailangang bawat isa sa atin ay magdadala ng kahit anong bagay.
Halimbawa ang dadalhin ko ay asukal ikaw naman ay bulak."
Tumawa ang Agila sa narinig na sinabi ni Maya. Tuwang-tuwa
talaga siya, bakit nga naman hindi, mas hamak na magaan ang
bulak na dadalhin niya kumpara sa mabigat na asukal na dadalhin
naman nito.
"O ano, Agila, payag ka ba?" untag ni Maya.
"Aba oo, payag na payag ako."
"Sige doon tayo mag-uumpisa sa ilog na 'yon at doon tayo hihinto
sa tuktok ng mataas na bundok na iyon," wika pa ni Maya.
Gusto nang matawa ni Agila sa katuwaan dahil tiyak na ang panalo
niya, subalit hindi siya nagpahalata.
At sisimulan nga nila ang paligsahan.
Habang nasa kalagitnaan na sila ng kalawakan ay siya namang
pagbuhos ng malakas na ulan. Nabasa ang bulak na dala-dala ni
Agila kaya bumigat ito nang husto. Nahirapan si Agila , kaya
bumagal ang lipad niya.

147

Samantalang ang mabigat sa asukal na dala-dala naman ni Maya
ay nabasa din ng ulan kaya natunaw ito. Napabilis ang lipad ni
Maya.
Dahil sa pangyayari, unang nakarating si Maya sa tuktok ng
mataas na bundok at tinalo niya ang mayabang na Agila.
77. Hinamon ng agila ang maya
A. dahil ito ay nababagot
B. dahil gusto niyang ipakita na mas mabilis siyang
lumipad
C. dahil nais niyang may makasamang lumipad
D. dahil nais niyang patunayan na siya ay malaki
78. Ang maya ay masasabing
A. matino
B. mabikas
C. lubos na mapagtiwala
D. matalino
79. Samantala, masasabing ang agila ay
A. mapagmataas
B. mapagbalatkayo
C. malikahain
D. matalas mag-isip
80. Ang basahing ito ay isang uri ng
A. nobela.
B. tula.
C. pabula.
D. maikling kwento.
81. Ang aral na makukuha sa kwento ay
A. ang lahat ng binhi, gaano man kaliit, magbubunga din.
148

B. daig ng matulin ang masipag.
C. huwag tahakin ang bagong daan ng walang sapat na
kagamitan.
D. huwag maging mayabang at huwag ding maliitin ang
kakayahan ng ating kapwa.

For questions 82 – 86:
While narrativity is a type of meaning, interactivity, when put in the
service of entertainment, is a type of play. The combination of
narrativity and interactivity oscillates between two forms: the
narrative game, in which narrative meaning is subordinated to the
player’s actions, and the playable story, in which the player’s
actions are subordinated to narrative meaning. Or, to put it
differently, in a narrative game, story is meant to enhance
gameplay, while in a playable story, gameplay is meant to produce
story.
The concepts of narrative game and playable story reflect, in
their opposition, the distinction made by the French sociologist
Roger Caillois between two types of game: ludus and paidia. The
best example of paidia games is building imaginary scenarios with
toys, using them, in the words of Kendall Walton, as “props in a
game of make-believe.” These games do not aim at a specific goal,
and they do not lead to losing or winning. The pleasures of paidia
reside in the free play of the imagination, in adopting foreign
identities, in forming social relations, in building objects, in exploring
an environment, and above all in creating representation: paidia
games are fundamentally mimetic activities. If there are rules, they
are spontaneously created by the participants, as when a group of
children decides that a certain tree will be the house of the wolf,
and they can be renegotiated on the fly. Ludus games, by contrast,
are strictly controlled by pre-existing rules accepted by the
participants as part of a basic game contract, they lead to clearly
149

define states of winning or losing, and their pleasure resides in the
thrill of competition and in the satisfaction of solving problems.
What I call a narrative game is a ludus activity. If there is one
contribution that digital technology has made to the design of
games, it is their narrativization. By this term I mean the
transformation of what used to be abstract playfields (such as
chess boards and football fields) into concrete fictional worlds
populated by recognizable objects and indivituated characters. The
main difference between an abstract game like soccer or chess and
a narrativized video game like Half-Life, Max Payne, or Grand Theft
Auto is that in an abstract game the goals of players are only made
desirable by the rules of the game (Who would, in real life, be
interested in kicking a ball into a net, or in moving tokens on a
board?), while in a narrativized game the player pursues the kind of
goals that people may form in everyday life or in their fantasies. But
in the intensity of the action, players may forget whether they are
terrorists or counter-terrorists, space aliens or defenders of the
earth: in a narrative game, the player plays to win, to beat the
game, and story is mostly a lure into the game world.
While ludus inspires narrative games, the spirit of paidia
infuses playable stories. In a playable story there is no winning or
losing: the purpose of the player is not to beat the game, but to
observe the evolution of the story world. Playable stories induce a
much more aesthetic pleasure than narrative games because the
player is not narrowly focused on goals. For me the essence of the
playable story is captured by what I once heard a little girl say
about the game The Sims: “Guess what I managed to do with my
Sims? I made the father and the mother drown in the pool, and now
the kids are alone in the house and they can do whatever they
want.”

150

82. Which of the following statements would the author be likely to
agree?
A. In a playable story, the pleasure of the game did not come
from reaching a state defined by rules, but in coaxing a
good story out of the system.
B. The pleasure of narrative game resides in the vast
imagination of the participants.
C. The users in both playable story and narrative game aim to
manipulate one or more characters in the fictional world.
D. Both playable story and narrative game aim to manipulate.
83. Which of the following ideas is NOT included in this passage?
A. Paidia games are primarily imitative activities.
B. Ludus games are strictly manipulated by a narrative
created by the participants.
C. In a playable story, the purpose of the player is to observe
the development of the storyworld.
D. In a narrativized game, the goals of the player are based
from his/her reality and fantasy.
84. Which of the following is not a situation in a narrativized game?
A. A police rescued people in danger.
B. A girl decided that the forest will be her home.
C. A group of students saved the world from space aliens.
D. A pedestrian stole cars and killed people.
85. According to the passage, which of the following is not a
characterisitc of paidia?
A. The games have no specific rules, and do not aim at
specific goal.
B. The rules are instinctively created by the participants.
C. The games are confined with pre-existing rules established
by the participants. The games do not lead to winning or
losing.
151

86. Which two main organizational schemes can be identified in this
passage?
A. Chronological order and compare and contrast
B. Order by topic and compare and contrast
C. Hierarchical order and order by topic
D. Hierarchical order and chronological order

For questions 87 – 93:
SA PAMILIHAN NG PUSO
Huwag kang iibig nang dahil sa pilak
pilak ay may pakpak
dagling lumilipad
pag iniwan ka na, ikaw’y maghihirap.
Huwag kang iibig nang dahil sa ganda
ganda’y nagbabawa
kapag tumanda na
ang lahat sa mundo’y sadyang nag-iiba.
Huwag kang iibig sa dangal ng irog
kung ano ang tayog
siya ring kalabog
walang taong hindi sa hukay nahulog.
Huwag kang iibig dahilan sa nasang
maging masagana
sa aliw at tuwa
pagkat ang pag-ibig ay di nadadaya...
Kung ikaw’y iibig ay yaong gusto mo
at mahal sa iyo
kahit siya’y ano,
pusong-puso lainang ang gawin mong dulo.
152

Kung ikàw’y masawi’y sawi kang talaga
ikaw na suminta
ang siyang magbata;
kung maging mapalad, higit ka sa iba.
Sa itong pag-ibig ay lako ng puso
di upang magtubo
kaya sumusuyo
pag-ibig ay hukay ng pagkasiphayo.

87. Sino ang persona sa loob ng tula?
A. Isang baguhang mangingibig
B. Isang mangingibig na nagdaan na sa maraming
kasawian
C. Isang maalam na mangingibig
D. Isang mangingibig na puno ng hinanakit
88. Para sa persona, ang pag-ibig ay
A. nagdudulot ng pighati.
B. pinagmumulan ng opresyon.
C. susi sa maluwalhating pagsasama.
D. nagbibigay sigla sa lahat.
89. Ano ang layunin ng persona sa loob ng tula?
A. magbigay-babala
B. magturo
C. magpayo
D. maglabas ng hinanakit

153

90. Alin sa mga sumusunod ang hindi ipinahihiwatig ng persona?
A. Huwag iibig nang dahil sa pera.
B. Huwag iibig nang dahil sa itsura.
C. Huwag iibig nang dahil lamang sa sarling kagustuhan.
D. Huwag iibig nang dahil sa katayuan ng mangingibig.
91. Ano ang implikasyon ng “pilak ay may pakpak” sa mensahe ng
tula?
A. walang mararating ang pera
B. madaling nauubos ang pera
C. hindi nawawala ang pera
D. higit na mahalaga ang pera
92. Sino ang kinakausap ng persona sa loob ng tula?
A. ang kanyang mangingibig
B. ang kanyang inibig
C. isang mangingibig
D. isang iniibig
93. Anong uri ng tula ang binasa?
A. tulang may sukat
B. tulang may tugma
C. tulang may sukat at tugma
D. malayang taludturan

For questions 94 – 100:
The Filipinos were found to be a literate people by the Spanish
colonizers when they reached the islands in 1521. They found the
natives with systems of writing, with language of their own in many
dialects, and with education and law to wit. Father Chirino wrote
that the "islanders are much given to reading and writing and there
is hardly a man, much less a woman, who does not read and write
154

in letters proper to the island of Manila, very different from those of
China, Japan and India" (1969, p. 280). The early Filipinos wrote on
bamboos, barks of trees, leaves of plants which are perishable
materials, hence no extant specimens exist today. The Spaniards
brought the Roman alphabet which eventually superseded the old
Tagalog syllabary.
The pre-Spanish Filipino had a syllabary derived from the south
Indian development of the Brahmi scripts used in the Asoka
Inscriptions about 300 years before Christ. According to J.R.
Francisco, there are at least six theories in the introduction of the
Tagalog syllabary (the sixth theory is the author’s). The first theory
is credited to Isaac Taylor which states that the system of writing,
particularly Tagalog was introduced from the coast of Bengal
sometime before the 8th century A.D. The second theory was
advanced by Fletcher Gardner who said that the Philippine scripts
came from India during Asoka’s reign. He said that Hindu
missionaries visited the islands and established Manila as the
center of Vedic learning. David Diringer advanced the theory that
the Indonesian script had its origin in India and that this constituted
the earliest type of Philippine syllabic writing which was brought to
the Philippines by the intervention of Buginese scripts from the 5th
century A.D. Of interest is the theory of Constantino Lendayno who
noted that the Philippine script was the invention of the Filipino
people without any foreign influences. The fourth theory is called
the Dravidian theory by V. A. Makarenko which states that Tagalog,
both language and script originated from Tamil, an Indian language.
This was further enhanced by H. Otley Beyer who said that these
scripts reached the Philippines from the Asian continent about 200
B.C. The sixth theory, expounded by J. R. Francisco himself, states
that the Sumatran scripts are similar to the Philippine scripts,
particularly the Palawan Tagbanua and the Mindoro Mangyan and
considering the movement of culture from one region to another or
in reverse, this was quite possible.
The ancient Filipino syllabary was non-pictographic, and resembled
closely the scripts of Buginese, Java, Batak, etc. There were
sixteen scripts used by regional groups, i.e., Tagalog, Bisayan,
155

Pampangan, etc. The scripts show certain similarities in their origin
and tradition. The Tagalog character was probably the most
important script of the period. It consisted of seventeen letters–14
consonants and 3 vowels. These vowels acquire a modified
pronunciation when the vowel mark is placed either above or below
the consonant.
The direction of writing was sometimes from top to bottom or right
to left or left to right then top to bottom horizontally. This is a
problem in reading the ancient Philippine script as no one knows
which direction the writers wrote. Authorities differ in their opinion
on the direction of writing.
Books and Bookmaking in the Philippines by R. M. Vallejo, National
Commission for the Culture and the Arts
94. What is the purpose of the author for writing the passage?
A. To describe the way of life which Filipinos had before the coming
of the Spaniards to the country
B. To narrate and recount the development of writing in the Tagalog
syllabary
C. To explain the different theories which surround the introduction
of the Tagalog syllabary in the country
D. To inform the readers of the existing organized system of writing
in the Philippines even before colonizers had arrived
95. Which statement from the passage encapsulates its main idea?
A. “The Spaniards found the natives with systems of writing, with
language of their own in many dialects, and with education and law
to wit.”
B. “The Spaniards brought the Roman alphabet which eventually
superseded the old Tagalog syllabary.”
C. “The pre-Spanish Filipino had a syllabary derived from the South
Indian development of the Brahmi
scripts used in the Asoka Inscriptions about 300 years before
Christ.”
156

D. “Father Chirino wrote that the "islanders are much given to
reading and writing and there is hardly a man, much less a woman,
who does not read and write in letters proper to the island of
Manila, very different from those of China, Japan, and India."”

96. Based on the passage, which of the following statements is
false?
A. The pronunciation of vowels of the Tagalog characters was
altered depending on the placement of the vowel mark on the
consonant.
B. The ancient Filipino syllabary resembled closely the scripts of
Buginese, Java, and Batac languages, which were largely
pictographic.
C. Authorities are not able to arrive at an agreement as to the
direction of writing that the Tagalog script had.
D. Francisco, in writing about Philippine writing, also developed his
own theory on the introduction of Tagalog syllabary.

97. The structure of the passage is:
A. descriptive
B. expository
C. informative
D. argumentative
98. The word extant as used in the passage is similar in meaning
with the word:
A. durable
B. inexistent
C. living
D. extensive

157

99. According to the author, which among these is not a theory on
the development of the Tagalog syllabary?
A. Hindu missionaries visited the Philippine islands and established
Manila as the center of Buginese
learning.
B. About 200 B.C., Tamil, an Indian language, reached the
Philippines from the Asian continent and
influenced Tagalog language, and script.
C. The script of the Tagalog syllabary was solely a Filipino
invention.
D. It was before the 8th century AD that the Tagalog system of
writing was introduced from the coast of Bengal.

100. What is the tone of the author in the passage?
A. Objective
B. Serious
C. Melancholic
D. Evocative

For questions 101 – 110:
This passage is adapted from Edith Wharton’s “The House of
Mirth.”
Selden paused in surprise. In the afternoon rush of the Grand
Central Station his eyes had been refreshed by the sight of Miss
Lily Bart.
It was a Monday in early September, and he was returning to his
work from a hurried dip into the country; but what was Miss Bart
doing in town at that season? If she had appeared to be catching a
train, he might have inferred that he had come on her in the act of
transition between one and another of the country-houses which
158

disputed her presence after the close of the Newport season; but
her desultory air perplexed him. She stood apart from the crowd,
letting it drift by her to the platform or the street, and wearing an air
of irresolution which might, as he surmised, be the mask of a very
definite purpose. It struck him at once that she was waiting for
someone, but he hardly knew why the idea arrested him. There
was nothing new about Lily Bart, yet he could never see her without
a faint movement of interest: it was characteristic of her that she
always roused speculation, that her simplest acts seemed the result
of far-reaching intentions.
An impulse of curiosity made him turn out of his direct line to the
door, and stroll past her. He knew that if she did not wish to be
seen she would contrive to elude him; and it amused him to think of
putting her skill to the test.
“Mr. Selden—what good luck!”
She came forward smiling, eager almost, in her resolve to intercept
him. One or two persons, in brushing past them, lingered to look;
for Miss Bart was a figure to arrest even the suburban traveller
rushing to his last train.
Selden had never seen her more radiant. Her vivid head, relieved
against the dull tints of the crowd, made her more conspicuous than
in a ball-room, and under her dark hat and veil she regained the
girlish smoothness, the purity of tint, that she was beginning to lose
after eleven years of late hours and indefatigable dancing. Was it
really eleven years, Selden found himself wondering, and had she
indeed reached the nine-and-twentieth birthday with which her
rivals credited her?
“What luck!” she repeated. “How nice of you to come to my rescue!”
He responded joyfully that to do so was his mission in life, and
asked what form the rescue was to take.
159

“Oh, almost any—even to sitting on a bench and talking to me. One
sits out a cotillion—why not sit out a train? It isn’t a bit hotter here
than in Mrs. Van Osburgh’s conservatory—and some of the women
are not a bit uglier.” She broke off, laughing, to explain that she had
come up to town from Tuxedo, on her way to the Gus Trenors’ at
Bellomont, and had missed the three-fifteen train to Rhinebeck.
“And there isn’t another till half-past five.” She consulted the little
jewelled watch among her laces. “Just two hours to wait. And I
don’t know what to do with myself. My maid came up this morning
to do some shopping for me, and was to go on to Bellomont at one
o’clock, and my aunt’s house is closed, and I don’t know a soul in
town.” She glanced plaintively about the station. “It IS hotter than
Mrs. Van Osburgh’s, after all. If you can spare the time, do take me
somewhere for a breath of air.”
He declared himself entirely at her disposal: the adventure struck
him as diverting. As a spectator, he had always enjoyed Lily Bart;
and his course lay so far out of her orbit that it amused him to be
drawn for a moment into the sudden intimacy which her proposal
implied.
“Shall we go over to Sherry’s for a cup of tea?”
She smiled assentingly, and then made a slight grimace.
“So many people come up to town on a Monday—one is sure to
meet a lot of bores. I’m as old as the hills, of course, and it ought
not to make any difference; but if I’M old enough, you’re not,” she
objected gaily. “I’m dying for tea—but isn’t there a quieter place?”
He answered her smile, which rested on him vividly. Her discretions
interested him almost as much as her imprudences: he was so sure
that both were part of the same carefully-elaborated plan. In judging
Miss Bart, he had always made use of the “argument from design.”

160

“The resources of New York are rather meagre,” he said; “but I’ll
find a hansom first, and then we’ll invent something.” He led her
through the throng of returning holiday-makers, past sallow-faced
girls in preposterous hats, and flat-chested women struggling with
paper bundles and palm-leaf fans. Was it possible that she
belonged to the same race? The dinginess, the crudity of this
average section of womanhood made him feel how highly
specialized she was.
A rapid shower had cooled the air, and clouds still hung refreshingly
over the moist street.
“How delicious! Let us walk a little,” she said as they emerged from
the station.
They turned into Madison Avenue and began to stroll northward. As
she moved beside him, with her long light step, Selden was
conscious of taking a luxurious pleasure in her nearness: in the
modelling of her little ear, the crisp upward wave of her hair—was it
ever so slightly brightened by art?—and the thick planting of her
straight black lashes. Everything about her was at once vigorous
and exquisite, at once strong and fine. He had a confused sense
that she must have cost a great deal to make, that a great many
dull and ugly people must, in some mysterious way, have been
sacrificed to produce her. He was aware that the qualities
distinguishing her from the herd of her sex were chiefly external: as
though a fine glaze of beauty and fastidiousness had been applied
to vulgar clay. Yet the analogy left him unsatisfied, for a coarse
texture will not take a high finish; and was it not possible that the
material was fine, but that circumstance had fashioned it into a
futile shape?

101. As used in paragraph 1, the word “refreshed” most nearly
means
A. recreated.
161

B. reanimated.
C. repaired.
D. reinvigorated.
102. In the context of the passage, the author’s use of the
sentence, “There was nothing new about Lily Bart,” (paragraph 2) is
primarily meant to convey the idea that
A. Lily Bart’s income doesn’t allow her to keep up with the latest
fashions.
B. Lily Bart is twenty-nine years old, and older than most of
Selden’s peers.
C. Selden and Lily have been acquaintances for some time, and
Selden could read her behavior.
D. Lily’s manner and behavior has a timeless quality in Selden’s
eyes.
103. The description in the second paragraph indicates that what
Selden values most about Lily is her
A. physical attractiveness.
B. ability to incite curiosity.
C. kind and generous nature.
D. way of standing out in a crowd.

104. Which choice provides the best evidence for the answer to the
previous question?
A. Paragraph 2, Sentence 1 (“It was a Monday in early…in town at
that season?”).
B. Paragraph 2, Sentence 2 (“If she had appeared to be…desultory
air perplexed him.”).
C. Paragraph 2, Sentences 3–4 (“She stood apart from the…why
the idea arrested him.”).
D. Paragraph 2, Sentence 5 (“There was nothing new…farreaching intentions.”).
162

105. The author includes the following detail: “it amused him to
think of putting her skill to the test” (paragraph 3) in order to
A. indicate that Lily has some experience in avoiding people she
does not want to talk to.
B. imply that Lily has had numerous suitors in the past.
C. reveal that Lily has snubbed Selden on previous occasions.
D. show that Lily has a strong and stubborn sense of pride.
106. What is implied by the author’s inclusion of the detail, “she
regained the girlish smoothness, the purity of tint, that she was
beginning to lose after eleven years of late hours and indefatigable
dancing” (paragraph 6)?
A. Though attractive, Lily Bart was not as energetic and youthful as
she had once been.
B. Lily’s skin and hair always looked very smooth, and today she
looked no different.
C. Selden had not seen Lily for eleven years.
D. Lily had been participating in the social activities of high society
for quite some time.

107. The author’s statement that, “his course lay so far out of her
orbit,” (paragraph 10) has mainly which effect?
A. It explains why Selden has not run into Lily in several years.
B. It describes how inferior Selden feels in relation to Lily.
C. It shows that they do not live in the same neighborhood in New
York.
D. It reveals that they move in different social circles.

108. Details from the passage imply that the Trenors are
A. members of Lily’s social class.
B. personal friends of Selden.
163

C. New York acquaintances of both Lily and Selden.
D. members of Lily’s extended family.
109. Why does Selden say, “The resources of New York are rather
meagre… but I’ll find a hansom first, and then we’ll invent
something” (paragraph 15)?
A. Selden is frustrated with the speed of the city’s public
transportation.
B. Selden is being playful and friendly for Lily’s benefit.
C. Selden is confident in his ability to impress Lily.
D. There is nowhere close by where they can have tea.

110. Over the course of the passage, the main focus of the
narrative shifts from the
A. curiosity that Selden has about Miss Lily Bart, who he has just
run into, to a growing fondness he has for her beauty.
B. annoyance Selden feels about the volatile nature of Miss Lily
Bart to the Selden’s recognition of the common ground between
them.
C. nervousness Selden feels regarding Miss Lily Bart to Selden’s
concern that his romantic feelings are not reciprocated.
D. value Selden attaches to the wonders of the natural world to a
rejection of that sort of beauty in favor of human artistry.

For questions 111 – 116:
The Queen City of the South is fast becoming an ideal wedding
destination.
If before, Manila was the only place being considered by foreign
travelers visiting the Philippines, Cebu now comes to their mind,
especially when looking for the country’s most important wedding—
and honeymoon—destination.
164

“For those who look for diverse locations, Cebu is the destination of
choice,” Department of Tourism (DOT) Cebu/Region VII director
Rica Bueno told the Business Mirror in an e-mail interview. “There
is a variety of themes and venues available [here]—from heritageinspired, island or beach, laid-back garden reception, or a ballroom
in a fine hotel. Cebu is also an ideal jumpoff point for islandhopping in the Visayas for adventurous couples.”
The DOT has been promoting Cebu—apart from Boracay and
Palawan—as a primary wedding destination for foreign tourists
looking to have exotic weddings outside their home countries. This
is primarily because the city gives the best of nature, culture and
adventure, according to Eduardo Jarque Jr., DOT undersecretary
for tourism planning and promotions.
“The rich history of the country’s past is mirrored in heritage
buildings and churches. The beaches and islands are perfect
destinations for nature-loving couples. There’s a myriad of activities
such as heritage tours; eco-adventures such as diving, snorkeling,
island-hopping, bird watching and trekking. All these can be addons to the couple’s main event,” he said.
In recent years, the numbers of foreign guests who visited the
country for their wedding requirements significantly have increased.
Records from the DOT showed that a total of 96,296 visitors in
2006 went to the Philippines to get married, which went up to
111,948 in 2007, and then to 116,653 in 2008. The figures reflect a
significant 14-percent growth rate.
Local travel agencies, meanwhile, reported that they often receive
requests from foreign tourists, especially Japanese and Koreans,
for wedding ceremonies in Cebu. Just like markets in Asia-Pacific
and North America, they find that weddings here in the Philippines
are very pocket-friendly compared elsewhere.
According to Asawa (www.asawa.org), a Fil-West relationships web
site, a wedding and reception held locally can run anywhere from
165

$1,000 to $5,000 (P50,000 to P250,000), with a median of $2,500
(P125,000). This is far beyond a very modest wedding in the United
States held in just a house or a banquet hall that will not cost less
than $30,000, or a lavish wedding rite that can run from $100,000
to $200,000.
Taking into account the budget most foreign guests have for their
weddings, Annie Cuevas, tourism attaché in-charge of weddings
and honeymoon promotions in Los Angeles, noted that holding
nuptial ceremonies in the Philippines is a “costefficient option given
that they can have a complete package—a carefully planned
wedding and memorable reception, which allow them to take their
loved ones and close friends to the Philippines’ tropical islands.”
Aside from reasonable costs, the accessibility and availability of
facilities here make it a drawcard for couples looking for the best
wedding locations. In fact, additional flights to Cebu from Manila, as
well as other key cities in China and Taiwan, have been made
available for foreign visitors.
As proof that the Queen City of the South continues to become one
of the country’s anchor destinations luring couples who love nature,
culture, and adventure, Cebu was acknowledged as the “Best
Honeymoon Destination” in the recently concluded World Travel
Fair in Shanghai, China.
The tourism department commits itself to remain active in its
participation in weddings and honeymoon shows, print and online
advertisements, as well as conducting familiarization tours to the
Philippines for wedding planners from the US and Canada. Also, it
pushes further the ongoing “Romantic Philippines”
campaign, featuring unique getaways and exhilarating thrills to
capture more Asian couples. The global market size for weddings
and honeymoons is estimated at being between 3 million and 6
million trips per annum. Growth of this niche segment in the next
five years is expected to grow further.
166

However, there are certain elements of the wedding-andhoneymoon market that will experience particular growth. “Second
marriages and those marrying later in life [the 35-to-45 age group]
will generate demand for weddings-andhoneymoon tourism,”
Cuevas revealed. “The number of remarriages is increasing, and is
set to continue. Hence, the number of second honeymoons will also
increase.”
To cater to this trend, Jarque said the country’s facilities and
venues, as well as event planners and organizers, are all ready to
welcome those who will celebrate their momentous occasion in the
Philippines. “We aim to further tap this niche market through
offering more programs and packages through our partners,” he
added.
Say ‘I do’ in Cebu by R.L. Abad

111. This selection can most likely be found in:
A. the local news section of a newspaper
B. a tourism magazine
C. the entertainment section of a newspaper
D. a government website
112. The following are synonyms of the word attaché as used in the
selection EXCEPT:
A. agent
B. haversack
C. envoy
D. plenipotentiary
113. A continuation of this selection would most likely expound on:
A. the advantages and disadvantages of holding weddings in cebu
B. how cebu was first advertised and promoted by the government
167

C. the continuous increase of foreign tourists in Cebu based on
statistics and records of hotels and resorts from the place
D. the reasons why cebu is an ideal place as promoted by wedding
photographers and organizers
114. In the last paragraph, the use of the word niche most closely
pertains to a:
A. subdivision
B. fissure
C. expertise
D. rendezvous
115. It may be inferred from paragraph 7 that:
A. A modest wedding in the US will cost couples a minimum of
$30,000.
B. Local travel agencies are receiving increasing booking requests
for wedding ceremonies.
C. Cebu has attracted not only foreign visitors from Asia-Pacific but
also foreigners coming from the
West.
D. Wedding ceremonies and receptions cost less in the Philippines
compared to the United States.
116. The word drawcard in the ninth paragraph means:
A. a favorite spot
B. something that attracts patrons
C. an ideal getaway or place of vacation
D. something that represents their ideals
For questions 117 – 124:
The lives of Ancient Greeks revolved around eris, a concept by
which they defined the universe. They believed that the world
existed in a condition of opposites. If there was good, then there
168

was evil, if there was love, then there was hatred; joy, then sorrow;
war then peace; and so on. The Greeks believed that good eris
occurred when one held a balanced outlook on life and coped with
problems as they arose. It was a kind of ease of living that came
from trying to bring together the great opposing forces in nature.
Bad eris was evident in the violent conditions that ruled men’s lives.
Although these things were found in nature and sometimes
could not be controlled, it was believed that bad eris occurred when
one ignored a problem, letting it grow larger until it destroyed not
only that person, but his family as well. The Ancient Greeks saw
eris as a goddess: Eris, the Goddess of Discord, better known as
trouble.
One myth that expresses this concept of bad eris deals with
the marriage of King Peleus and the river goddess Thetis. Zeus, the
supreme ruler, learns that Thetis would bear a child strong enough
to destroy its father. Not wanting to ruin the father, Zeus convinces
Thetis to marry a human, a mortal whose child could never
challenge the gods. He promises her, among other things, the
greatest wedding in all of Heaven and Earth and allows the couple
to invite whomever they please. This is one of the most mixed
marriages of Greek Mythology and the lesson learned from it still
applies today. They do invite everyone . . . except Eris, the
Goddess of Discord. In other words, instead of facing the problems
brought on by a mixed marriage, they turn their backs on them.
They refused to deal directly with their problems and the result is
tragic. In her fury, Eris arrives, ruins the weddings, causes a jealous
feud between the three major goddesses over a golden apple, and
sets in place the conditions that lead to the Trojan War. The war
would take place 20 years in the future, but it would result in the
death of the only child of the bride and groom, Achilles. Eris would
destroy the parents’ hopes for their future, leaving the couple with
no legitimate heirs to the throne.
Hence, when we are told, “If you don’t invite trouble, trouble
comes,” it means that if we don’t deal with our problems, our
problems will deal with us . . . with a vengeance! It is easy to see
169

why the Greeks considered many of their myths learning myths, for
this one teaches us the best way to defeat that which can destroy
us.
117. Which of the following statements can be inferred from the
passage about Zeus?
A. He feared having an affair with Thetis and, subsequently, a
child by her.
B. He wanted to be the great king of mankind.
C. He had foreseen that he will be killed during the Trojan
War.
D. He has a secret affair with Thetis.

118. The author makes which of the following points about the
concept of eris?
A. It defined the universe as a series of problems.
B. It defined the universe as a condition of opposites.
C. It defined the universe a mixture of gods and man.
D. It defined the universe as a violent condition that ruled
men’s lives.

119. The passage suggests that Zeus did not fear a child sired by
King Peleus because
A. he knew that no matter how strong a mortal child was, he
could not overthrow an immortal god.
B. he knew that Thetis would never love a child from a mortal.
C. he knew that the child would be killed in the Trojan War.
D. he knew that Thetis would always love him above
everyone else.

120. Most explicitly, bad eris is defined in the passage as
A. the problems man encounters.
170

B. the violent conditions of life.
C. the evil goddess who has a golden apple.
D. the source of troubles in life.

121. Based on the passage, Achilles?
A. was the illegitimate son of Peleus.
B. was one of the greatest heroes in the Trojan War.
C. dies during the Trojan War.
D. defeated Zeus during the Trojan War.
122. Which of the following statements is the message offered in
the myth?
A. Do not let future circumstances control the present
situation.
B. Do not hate the Greek Gods.
C. Do not consider a mixed marriage.
D. Do not ignore the problems that arise in life.

123. What main organizational scheme can be identified in the
passage?
A. hierarchical order
B. chronological order
C. order by topic
D. compare and contrast
124. Which of the following statements would the author be likely to
agree with?
A. Greek myths teach the people to face the problems in
life which can obliterate them.
B. One can defeat bad eris by disregarding his problems in
life.
C. Greek myths will not always be too didactic.
171

D. Bad eris recurs in one’s life if he keep on accepting the
difficulties in life.

For questions 125 – 131:
There was no possibility of taking a walk that day. We had been
wandering, indeed, in the leafless shrubbery an hour in the
morning; but since dinner (Mrs. Reed, when there was no
company, dined early) the cold winter wind had brought with it
clouds so sombre, and a rain so penetrating, that further outdoor
exercise was now out of the question.
I was glad of it: I never liked long walks, especially on chilly
afternoons: dreadful to me was the coming home in the raw twilight,
with nipped fingers and toes, and a heart saddened by the chidings
of Bessie, the nurse, and humbled by the consciousness of my
physical inferiority to Eliza, John, and Georgiana Reed.
The said Eliza, John, and Georgiana were now clustered round
their mama in the drawing-room: she lay reclined on a sofa by the
fireside, and with her darlings about her (for the time neither
quarrelling nor crying) looked perfectly happy. She and I had
dispensed from joining the group; saying, “She regretted to be
under the necessity of keeping me at a distance; but that until she
heard from Bessie, and could discover by her own observation, that
I was endeavouring in good earnest to acquire a more sociable and
childlike disposition, a more attractive and sprightly manner—
something lighter, franker, more natural, as it were—she really
must exclude me from privileges intended only for contented,
happy, little children.”
“What does Bessie say I have done?” I asked.
“Jane, I don’t like cavillers or questioners; besides, there is
something truly forbidding in a child taking up her elders in that
172

manner. Be seated somewhere; and until you can speak
pleasantly, remain silent.”
A breakfast-room adjoined the drawing-room, I slipped in there. It
contained a bookcase: I soon possessed myself of a volume, taking
care that it should be one stored with pictures. I mounted into the
window-seat: gathering up my feet, I sat cross-legged, like a Turk;
and, having drawn the red moreen curtain nearly close, I was
shrined in double retirement.
Folds of scarlet drapery shut in my view to the right hand; to the left
were the clear panes of glass, protecting, but not separating me
from the drear November day. At intervals, while turning over the
leaves of my book, I studied the aspect of that winter afternoon.
Afar, it offered a pale blank of mist and cloud; near a scene of wet
lawn and stormbeat shrub, with ceaseless rain sweeping away
wildly before a long and lamentable blast.
Excerpt from Jane Eyre (Chapter 1) by Charlotte Brontë
125. The theme of the passage is:
A. the kind and characteristics of winter that the character
experiences during november
B. the emotions and situation of the character as conveyed by the
setting of the narrative
C. the escape that the character seeks to have from her current
situation
D. the characteristics of the place and the family to which the
character is situated
126. What does the word caviller in the fifth paragraph most nearly
means?
A. Someone who is extremely curious
B. A disrespectful child
C. A person who raises trivial objections
D. Annoyingly noisy people
173

127. Which of the following inferences is supported by the second
and third paragraphs?
A. Jane was under the care of a family not her own.
B. Jane was scolded by their mother and was therefore secluded
from the company of her siblings.
C. Bessie was speaking ill of Jane.
D. Mrs. Reed simply wanted Jane to be a happy child.
128. The word dinner as used in the second sentence of the first
paragraph means:
A. The heavy meal taken in the evening
B. A complete meal at a fixed price in a restaurant
C. A public banquet in honor of someone
D. The main meal of the day taken at midday
129. What best describes the mood of Jane?
A. Lazy
B. Angry
C. Serious
D. Somber
130. What meaning does the phrase “shrined in double retirement”
in the sixth paragraph convey?
A. To step back and sulk in a corner
B. To feel extremely depressed
C. To retreat in a closed space both literally and figuratively
D. To remain silently reading a book in a secluded place
131. The winter November afternoon described in the passage is a
symbolism of what?
A. The physical inferiorities that Jane has of Eliza, John, and
Georgina Reed
B. The gloominess of the character’s situation and disposition
174

C. The burdensome place which the Reeds inhabit
D. The desires that Jane most earnestly seeks to have

For questions 132 – 141:
The following passage is adapted from, “An Introduction to the
Prose and Poetical Works of John Milton” by Hiram Corson.
Originally published in 2014.
John Milton’s prose works are perhaps not read, at the present day,
to the extent demanded by their great and varied merits. Some of
his poetical works are extensively “studied” in the schools, and a
somewhat reasonable stab at the study of some of his prose works
is made in departments of rhetoric, but his prose works cannot be
said to be read in the best sense of the word,—that is, with all
faculties focused upon the subject-matter as one of major
importance, with an openness of heart, and with an accompanying
interest in the general loftiness of Milton’s diction. In short,
everyone should train himself or herself to read any great author
with the fullest loyalty to the author — by which is not meant that all
the author’s thoughts, opinions and beliefs are to be accepted, but
that what they really are be adequately apprehended. In other
words, loyalty to an author means that every reader fully attempt to
understand and receive the work’s intended meaning and spirit.
Mark Pattison, in his Life of Milton, while fully recognizing the grand
features of the prose works as monuments of the English language,
undervalues, or rather does not value at all, Milton’s services to the
cause of political and religious liberty as a polemic prose writer, and
considers it a thing to be much regretted that he engaged at all in
the great contest for political, religious, and other forms of liberty.
This seems to be the one unacceptable feature of his very able life
of the poet. Looking upon the life of Milton the politician merely as a
sad and ignominious interlude in the life of Milton the poet, Pattison
cannot be expected to entertain the idea that the poem is in any
175

sense the work of the politician. Yet we cannot help thinking that
the tension and elevation which Milton’s nature had undergone in
the mighty struggle, together with the heroic dedication of his
faculties to the most serious objects, must have had not a little to
do both with the final choice of his subject and with the tone of his
poems. Milton’s great Puritan poetry could hardly have been written
by anyone but a militant Puritan.
Milton was writing prose when, some think, he should have been
writing poetry, and, as Pattison claims, these works of Milton had
no influence whatsoever on current events. But they certainly had
an influence, and a very great influence, on current events not
many years after. The restoration of Charles II did not mean that
the work of Puritanism was undone, and that Milton’s pamphlets
were to be of no effect. It was in a large measure due to that work
and to those pamphlets that in a few years—only fourteen after
Milton’s death—the constitutional basis of the monarchy underwent
a radical change for the better,—a change which would have been
a great pleasure to Milton, if he could have lived to see it. A man
constituted as Milton was could not have kept himself apart from
the great conflicts of his time. Although the direct subjects of his
polemic prose works may not hold a huge interest for the general
reader in the present-day, they are all, independently of their
subjects, charged with inherent truth and as profoundly expressive
as his poetry. All of Milton’s work, both poetry and prose, are full of
bright gems of enduring truth.

132. The main purpose of the first paragraph is
A. to describe a failure to appreciate Milton’s prose.
B. to explain how readers can understand what an author intends.
C. to criticize Pattison for missing the importance Milton’s politics
had on his poetry.
D. to explain the lasting impact and value of Milton prose.

176

133. Why does the author use quotation marks around the word
“studied” in sentence 2?
A. To show that most English teachers are not qualified for their
positions.
B. To explain why Milton is little understood by the general public.
C. To indicate students rarely complete their homework on poets
such as Milton.
D. To emphasize the incompleteness with which Milton is
understood and examined.
134. As used in the first sentence of paragraph 2, “polemic” most
nearly means
A. having an intricate or exquisite quality.
B. covering many different topics.
C. socially engaged in activism.
D. incongruously political.

135. Which sentence(s) best detail(s) the author’s criticism of Mark
Pattison’s work?
A. Paragraph 2, Sentence 1 (“Mark…liberty.”)
B. Paragraph 2, Sentences 2–3 (“This…politician.”)
C. Paragraph 2, Sentence 4 (“Yet…poems.”)
D. Paragraph 2, Sentence 5 (“Milton’s…Puritan.”)
136. The author included the sentence, “But they certainly had an
influence, and a very great influence, on current events not many
years after” (2nd sentence of paragraph 3) in order to
A. refute the sentence immediately before it.
B. change to a new topic before ending the essay.
C. praise the far-reaching impact of Pattison’s work.
D. introduce a criticism that has not yet been discussed.

177

137. The primary purpose of this passage is to
A. compare Milton’s poetry to his prose works, and emphasize the
latent value of the latter.
B. decry the unwarranted criticism Milton’s prose works have
received.
C. recommend a reevaluation of Milton’s prose works by Pattison
and similar scholars.
D. criticize Pattison’s interpretation of Milton’s motives and
emphasize the true value of his prose work.
138. Which of the following best summarizes the author’s
interpretation of Pattison’s work on Milton?
A. It does not appreciate Milton’s writing.
B. It is regrettable and ignominious.
C. It is notable but inadequate.
D. It fails to consider both Milton’s poetical and prose contributions.

139. The author of the passage implies all of the following about
Milton EXCEPT
A. Milton’s polemical writing favored the ideals of the Puritan
movement.
B. Milton’s interest in polemic prose did not influence his poetry.
C. Milton was actively engaged in the politics of his day.
D. Milton likely opposed monarchism and totalitarian rule.
140. Which choice provides the best evidence for the answer to the
previous question?
A. Paragraph 2, Sentence 4 (“Yet…poems.”)
B. Paragraph 3, Sentences 1–2 (“Milton…after.”)
C. Paragraph 3, Sentences 3–4 (“The restoration…it.”)
D. Paragraph 3, Sentences 5–6 (“A man…poetry.”)

178

141. As used in paragraph 3, the word “constituted” most nearly
means
A. with a repetitive behavioral pattern.
B. initiated in a particular manner.
C. with a certain predisposition.
D. in a position of leadership.

For questions 142 – 145:

142. What emotion is conveyed by the editorial cartoon?
A. Fear
B. Cynicism
C. Grief
D. Ambiguity
143. What issue or situation is being depicted through the editorial
cartoon?
179

A. Children’s rights
B. Corporal punishment
C. Child trafficking
D. Delinquency in children

144. What may be inferred about the government through the
situation depicted in this editorial cartoon?
A. The government apathetically creates laws which exploit children
instead of protecting them.
B. The government is deaf to the implorations of children’s rights
advocates to write laws protecting
children.
C. The government has the power to intervene between parents’
disciplinary methods and children’s rights.
D. The government is on its way to crafting laws which respond to
the implorations of children’s rights
advocates.
145. The belt held by the adult in the editorial cartoon is
representative of what?
A. Corrective measures of older people to the young
B. Cruelties incurred by parents/guardians
C. Impositions of discipline to children
D. Physical punishment as tools for chastisement

For questions 146 – 147:
All mammals feed their young. Beluga whale mothers, for example, nurse their calves
for
some twenty months, until they are about to give birth again and their young are able to
find their own food. The behavior of feeding of the young is built into the reproductive
Line system. It is a nonelective part of parental care and the defining feature of a mammal, the
(5)
most important thing that mammals-- whether marsupials, platypuses, spiny anteaters, or
placental mammals -- have in common.

180

(10)

(15)

(20)

(25)

But not all animal parents, even those that tend their offspring to the point of hatching
or
birth, feed their young. Most egg-guarding fish do not, for the simple reason that their
young are so much smaller than the parents and eat food that is also much smaller than
the food eaten by adults. In reptiles, the crocodile mother protects her young after they
have hatched and takes them down to the water, where they will find food, but she does
not actually feed them. Few insects feed their young after hatching, but some make other
arrangement, provisioning their cells and nests with caterpillars and spiders that they have
paralyzed with their venom and stored in a state of suspended animation so that their
larvae might have a supply of fresh food when they hatch.
For animals other than mammals, then, feeding is not intrinsic to parental care. Animals
add it to their reproductive strategies to give them an edge in their lifelong quest for
descendants. The most vulnerable moment in any animal's life is when it first finds itself
completely on its own, when it must forage and fend for itself. Feeding postpones that
moment until a young animal has grown to such a size that it is better able to cope. Young
that are fed by their parents become nutritionally independent at a much greater fraction
of their full adult size. And in the meantime those young are shielded against the vagaries
of fluctuating of difficult-to-find supplies. Once a species does take the step of feeding its
young, the young become totally dependent on the extra effort. If both parents are
removed, the young generally do no survive.

146. What does the passage mainly discuss?
A. The care that various animals give to their offspring.
B. The difficulties young animals face in obtaining food.
C. The methods that mammals use to nurse their young.
D. The importance among young mammals of becoming
independent.
147. The author lists various animals in line 5 to
A. contrast the feeding habits of different types of mammals
B. describe the process by which mammals came to be
defined
C. emphasize the point that every type of mammal feeds its
own young
D. explain why a particular feature of mammals is nonelective

For questions 148 – 149:
The first peoples to inhabit what today is the southeastern United States sustained
themselves as hunters and gathers. Sometimes early in the first millennium A.D., however,
they began to cultivate corn and other crops. Gradually, as they became more skilled at
181

Line
(5)

(10)

(15)

(20)

gardening, they settled into permanent villages and developed a rich culture, characterized
by the great earthen mounds they erected as monuments to their gods and as tombs for
their distinguished dead. Most of these early mound builders were part of the
Adena-Hopewell culture, which had its beginnings near the Ohio River and takes its name
from sites in Ohio. The culture spread southward into the present-day states of Louisiana,
Alabama, Georgia, and Florida. Its peoples became great traders, bartering jewellery,
pottery, animal pelts, tools, and other goods along extensive trading networks that
stretched up and down eastern North America and as far west as the Rocky Mountains.
About A.D. 400, the Hopewell culture fell into decay. Over the next centuries, it was
supplanted by another culture, the Mississippian, named after the river along which many
of its earliest villages were located. This complex civilization dominated the Southeast from
about A.D. 700 until shortly before the Europeans began arriving in the sixteenth century.
At the peak of its strength, about the year 1200, it was the most advanced culture in North
America. Like their Hopewell predecessors, the Mississippians became highly skilled at
growing food, although on a grander scale. They developed an improved strain of corn,
which could survive in wet soil and a relatively cool climate, and also learned to cultivate
beans. Indeed, agriculture became so important to the Mississippians that it became
closely associated with the Sun – the guarantor of good crops. Many tribes called
themselves "children of the Sun" and believed their omnipotent priest-chiefs were
descendants of the great sun god.

Although most Mississippians lived in small villages, many others inhabited large
towns.
(25) Most of these towns boasted at least one major flat-topped mound on which stood a
temple that contained a sacred flame. Only priests and those charged with guarding the
flame could enter the temples. The mounds also served as ceremonial and trading sites,
and at times they were used as burial grounds.

148. What does the passage mainly discuss?
A. The development of agriculture
B. The locations of towns and villages
C. The early people and cultures of the United States
D. The construction of burial mounds
149. Why does the author mention that many Mississippians tribes
called themselves "children of the Sun" (line 22)?
A. To explain why they were obedient to their priest-chiefs.
B. To argue about the importance of religion in their culture.
C. To illustrate the great importance they placed on
agriculture.
D. To provide an example of their religious rituals.

182

6
Language Answer Key
1. B

10. A

19. C

2. B

11. C

20. C

3. A

12. D

21. C

4. D

13. A

22. B

5. C

14. C

23. A

6. B

15. A

24. D

7. A

16. C

25. C

8. B

17. B

26. A

9. D

18. A

27. C
183

28. D

41. D

54. C

29. A

42. B

55. C

30. B

43. A

56. A

31. B

44. D

57. D

32. B

45. C

58. A

33. D

46. D

59. D

47. B

60. A

48. A

61. D

49. C

62. D

50. C

63. C

51. D

64. A

52. A

65. B

53. B

66. A

34. A
35. C
36. C
37. A
38. A
39. D
40. C
184

67. A

80. A

93. A

68. C

81. D

94. D

69. C

82. A

95. D

70. C

83. A

96. A

71. D

84. B

97. B

72. B

85. B

98. C

73. D

86. C

99. B

74. D

87. D

100. A

75. B

88. A

101. D

76. D

89. B

102. B

77. D

90. B

103. A

78. B

91. D

104. A

79. C

92. B

105. A
185

106. D

119. A

132. B

107. A

120. C

133. C

108. B

121. D

134. D

109. A

122. C

135. A

110. D

123. A

136. D

111. B

124. D

137. B

112. A

125. B

138. C

113. A

126. A

139. A

114. D

127. A

140. C

115. A

128. D

141. C

116. B

129. B

142. B

117. A

130. C

143. A

118. C

131. B

144. C
186

145. D

147. C

149. B

146. D

148. D

150. A

187

7
Science Answer Key
1. D

10. D

19. D

2. A

11. B

20. A

3. A

12. D

21. C

13. D
4. A

22. A
14. A

5. D

23. B
15. B

6. B

24. B
16. C

25. A

17. C

26. D

18. A

27. C

7. A
8. A
9. D
188

28. C

41. C

54. D

29. D

42. B

55. C

30. A

43. D

56. A

31. B

44. B

57. B

32. B

45. A

58. C

33. A

46. A

59. C

34. C

47. A

60. A

35. D

48. C

61. D

36. A

49. D

62. A

37. D

50. C

63. D

38. B

51. B

64. B

39. D

52. C

65. D

40. B

53. D

66. B
189

67. A

78. D

89. D

68. B

79. D

90. B

69. B

80. A

91. A

70. C

81. A

92. A

71. A

82. D

93. A

72. A

83. C

94. D
95. A

73. A

84. A

74. B

85. C

96. B
97. A
75. D

86. A

76. B

87. C

77. D

88. D

98. C
99. A
100. A

190

8
Mathematics Answer Key
1. Answer: A.
If you think of distance above sea level as a positive number, then
you must think of going below sea level as a negative number.
Going up is in the positive direction, while going down is in the
negative direction. Give all the descending distances a negative
sign and the ascending distances a positive sign.
The resulting numerical expression would be as follows: −80 + +25
+ −12 + +52
Because addition is commutative, you can associate like-signed
numbers: (−80 + −12) + (+25 + +52)
Evaluate the numerical expression in each parentheses: [−80 + −12
= −92] [ +25 + +52 = +77]
Substitute the values into the numerical expression: (−92) + (+77)
Signs different? Subtract the value of the numbers and give the
result the sign of the higher value number. [92 − 77 = 15]
The diver took his rest stop at −15 feet.

191

2. Answer: D.
Substitute the values for the variables into the expression.
( ){(

− 3) − 4(3)}

Evaluate the expression in the innermost parentheses.
[(

− 3) = − 3]

PEMDAS: Division before subtraction. Substitute the result into the
numerical expression.
[ − 3 = 3 − 3 = 0]
( ){(0) − 4(3)}
Evaluate the expression inside the parentheses.
[{0 − 4(3)} = 0 − 4 · 3]
PEMDAS: Multiply before subtraction.
[0 − 4 · 3 = 0 − 12]
Change subtraction to addition and the sign of the term that follows.
[0 − 12 = 0 + −12 = −12]
Substitute the result into the numerical expression
( ){−12} = · −12
Signs different? Multiply numbers and give the result a negative
sign.
192

[ · 12 = 6]
· −12 = −6
The simplified value of the expression is as follows: y{( − 3) − 4a}
= -6
3. Answer: D.
To solve this problem, choose an even integer for x and an odd
integer for y and evaluate each of the answer choices. Set x = 0
and y = 1 → only x + y + 2 will evaluate to an odd integer.

4. Answer: A.
35% of 15% of a number is 0.35 * 0.15 of that number:
0.35 * 0.15 = 0.0525x
5. Answer: C.
This question is really asking for the perimeter of the field. Add up
all of the sides to find the perimeter:
(125 * 2) + (200 * 2) = 650
6. Answer: B.
Let x = the number of months. The number of months (x), times 12
(pounds per month), plus the starting weight (20), will be equal to 200
pounds.
An equation that represents these words would be 12x + 20 = 200.
193

Subtract 20 from both sides of the equation. 12x + 20 − 20 = 200 − 20
Associate like terms. 12x + (20 − 20) = 200 − 20
Perform numerical operations. 12x + (0) = 180
Divide both sides of the equation by 12.
=
x = 15
The farmer would have to wait 15 months before selling his hog.
7. Answer: C.
Let x = the number of boys who participate in interscholastic sports.
The question tells us that the number of boys plus 25 is equal to the
number of girls who participate.
An equation that represents this statement is x + 25 = 105.
Subtract 25 from both sides of the equation. x + 25 − 25 = 105 – 25
Perform numerical operations. x = 80
Multiply by the reciprocal of
( x) = (80)
x = 120
The number of boys who participate is 120.
8. Answer: B.

194

Only one line can pass through a point and be parallel to an existing
line.
9. Answer: B.
An infinite number of lines can pass through any given point in
space—only one line can pass through a point and be perpendicular
to an existing line. In this case, that point is on the line; however, this
rule also applies to points that are not on the line.
10. Answer: A.
When intersecting lines create right angles, they are perpendicular.
11. Answer: B.
Lines are straight; they cannot backtrack or bend (if they could bend,
they would be a curve, not a line). Consequently, when two lines
intersect, they can share only one point.
12. Answer: B.
When two lines intersect, they share a single point in space. That
point is technically on both lines.
13. Answer: D.
In order to be a transversal, a line must cut across two other lines at
different points. Line o crosses lines m and l at the same point; it is
not a transversal

195

14. Answer: A.
One approach this question is to draw it.

For the resulting parallelogram A'BAC, length c will not be included in
the perimeter (since CB is the diagonal of the parallelogram, not a
side).
All the answer choices with length c can be eliminated -- which leaves
us with just (A) and (E).
The perimeter can be found by adding up the lengths of the sides:
a+a+b+b
= 2a + 2b
= 2(a + b)
15. Answer: D.
Translate the given expressions into equations:
x * 0.6 = 12
x = 20
20 * 1.65 = 33
16. Answer: C.
Write the applicable formula. A = h(b1 + b2)
A = 7,200
b1 = 40
b2 = 80
h=?
196

Substitute the given values into the formula: 7,200 = · h · (40 + 80)
Simplify the expression: 7,200 = · h · 120 7,200 = 60 h
Divide both sides of the equation by 60.

=

Simplify the expression. 120 = h
Include the units. 120 ft = h
17. Answer: D.
Write the applicable formula. V = πr2h
List the values for the variables.
V = 13,565
r = 12
h=?
π = 3.14
Substitute the given values into the formula. 13,565 = (3.14)(12 2)h
Simplify the expression. 13,565 = 452.16h
Divide both sides of the equation by 452.16.

Simplify the expression. 30 = h
Include the units. 30 feet = h

197

18. Answer: B.
Write the applicable formula. S = 2πr(r + h)
List the values for the variables.
S = 2,512
r=x
h = 3x
π = 3.14
Substitute the given values into the formula. 2,512 = 2(3.14)(x)(x + 3x)
Simplify the expression. 2,512 = 6.28x(4x)
Divide both sides of the equation by 25.12.
=
Simplify the expression.
100 = x2
Solve for x.
10 = x
Substitute the value for x into the values list.
r = x = 10 feet
h = 3x = 3(10) = 30 feet

19. Answer: C.
Add 5 to both sides of the inequality. x − 5 + 5 > x − 2 + 5

198

Simplify. x > x + 3
Subtract 1x from both sides of the inequality.
x−x>x−x+3
x− x>x−x+3
Simplify the expressions.
x>3
Multiply both sides of the inequality by 3.
3( x) > 3(3)
( x) > 3 (3)
Simplify the expressions. x > 9

20. Answer: D.
A right triangle has a right angle and two acute angles; it does not
have any obtuse angles.
21. Answer: D.
Divide both sides of the equation by 3.
=

199

Simplify terms. 8x2 = 43x – 15
Add (15 − 43x) to both sides of the equation. 8x2 + 15 − 43x = 43x −
15 + 15 − 43x
Combine like terms. 8x2 + 15 − 43x = 0
Use the commutative property to move terms. 8x2 − 43x + 15 = 0
Factor the trinomial expression. (8x − 3)(x − 5) = 0
Using the zero product property, add 3 to both sides and divide by 8.
8x − 3 = 0
=
Simplify terms. x =
Now let the second factor equal zero. x − 5 = 0
Add 5 to both sides. x = 5
The solutions for the quadratic equation 24x2 = 3(43x − 15) are x =
and x = 5.
22. Answer: A.
The problem provides the lengths of two legs and an unknown angle.
You could solve for a hypotenuse using the Pythagorean theorem,
and then use sine or cosine. But the least amount of work uses what
the question provides. Only the trigonometric ratio sin uses the
lengths of two legs. Divide 13.9 by 20 and match the answer on the
chart.

200

23. Answer: B.
Horizontal lines are of the form y = constant and vertical lines are of
the from x = constant and therefore the two lines are neither horizontal
nor vertical. Let us find the slopes of the two given lines
y = 2x has a slope equal to 2
2y = - x is equivalent to y = -(1/2) x and its slope is equal to -(1/2)
Since the slopes are not equal, the two lines are not parallel. The
product of the two slopes is given by
2*-(1/2) = - 1
and hence the two lines are perpendicular.
24. Answer: B.
If the price is no less than 100 Dollars, then the price is either equal to
or greater than 100 Dollars.
x ≥ 100
25. Answer: D.
Substitute the coordinates of the given points in the given equation
and check which one gives a false statement.
Point (9,- 6) : - 6 = -(9) + 3 , - 6 = - 6 , true , point lies on the line
Point (3,0) : 0 = - (3) + 3 , 0 = 0 , true , point lies on the line
Point (-2,5) : 5 = - (-2) + 3 , 5 = 5 , true , point lies on the line
Point (2,2) : 2 = - (2) + 3 , 2 = 1 , false , point DOES NOT lie on the
line

201

26. Answer: C.
For the relation in C, when x = 2, there are two possible values of y: 3
or 7 and therefore the relation in C is not a function.
27. Answer: D.
We may use the Associative property of multiplication to write
3(x y) = (3 x)y
28. Answer: D.
Solve the inequality
-7x + 6 ≤ -8 , given
-7x + 6 - 6 ≤ -8 - 6 , add - 6 to both sides
-7x ≤ - 14 , simplify
-7x / -7 ≥ -14 / -7 , divide by - 7 and CHANGE symbol of inequality
x ≥ 2 , solution set
The answer to the question is D since 2 is greater that or equal to 2.
29. Answer: A.
We first rewrite the given equation in the form
|-2x - 5| = k + 3
The term |-2x - 5| is either positive or equal to zero. Therefore the
above equation has no solutions whenever the expression k + 3 is
negative. The values of k for which the above equation has no
solutions are solutions of the inequality
202

k + 3 < 0 or k < - 3
The answer is A since - 5 is less than - 3.

30. Answer: C.
The slope of the given (in slope intercept form) line is equal to - 5. Let
m be the slope of the line perpendicular to the given line. Two lines
are perpendicular if the product of their slopes is equal to -1. Hence
m*(-5) = - 1
Solve for m. Hence
m = 1/5 is the slope of a line perpendicular to the given line.
31. Answer: D.
I.

< x : if x = ,

< → < (false)

II. x2 > x : if x = , ( )2 > → > (false)
III. x2 >

: if x = , ( )2 >

→

> (false)

None of the above is true.

32. Answer: D.
4x2 + 7x + 3 = 2k
203

a=4
b=7
c=3–2k
b2 – 4ac = 0
72 – 4(4)(3 - 2k) = 0
49 – 48 + 32k = 0
k=-

33. Answer: A.
m=
=
=

34. Answer: D.
Let 2r = radius of smallest circle and 5r = radius of the largest circle
Asmall =
36

(2r)2

= 4 r2
9 = r2
3=r

Alarge =

(5r)2

=

(5 x 3)2

=

(15)2

204

= 225
35. Answer: A.
Here we are given a system of equations and asked to solve in terms
of one of the given variables. It is important to note that we are looking
for 3b and not solving for b alone. We will begin by solving for c in
terms of a using the first equation. We will then substitute this value
into the second equation so as to eliminate the c variable and be left
with only a’s and b’s. We will then solve for 3b:

Here we will multiply both sides by 3 so we have our target value of
3b on one side, and we will then simplify the expression on the other
side:
3b = 2(5 − a)
= 10 − 2a
36. Answer: C.
A. The sum of two odd integers. 15 + 15 = 30, 30 ÷ 10 = 3 (odd
integer)
B. The product of two prime numbers. 2 x 5 = 10, 10 ÷ 10 = 1 (odd
integer)
C. The product of two odd integers. 3 x 5 = 15, 15 ÷ 10 = 1.5 (not an
integer)
205

D. The sum of three consecutive integers. 9 + 10 + 11 = 30, 30 ÷ 10 =
3 (odd integer)
37. Answer: B.
2 - | - 2 | = 2 - 2 , since | - 2 | = 2
= 1 / 2 2 , since a -n = 1 / an
= 1/4 = 0.25
38. Answer: B.
Substitute x by -2 in f(x) as follows
f(-2) = 4(-2)3 - 4(-2)2 + 10
= 4(-8) - 4(4) + 10 = - 32 - 16 + 10 = - 38
39. Answer: D.
The two lines intersect at the point (3 , -4) which is in quadrant IV.
40. Answer: A.
The three denominators are different and therefore we need to find a
common denominator.
We first find the lowest common multiple (LCM) of the two
denominators 8, 12 and 16.
8: 8, 16, 24, 32, 40, 48, 56, 64, 72, 80,...
12: 12, 24, 36, 48, 60, 72, 84, 96,...
206

16: 16, 32, 48, 64, 80, 96...
The lowest common denominator is 48 and we now convert all 3
denominators to the common denominator 48 and simplify as follows:

41. Answer: D.
The two rational expressions have different denominators. In order to
add the rational expressions above, we need to convert them to a
common denominator. We factor completely the two denominators
x 2 + 6 x + 5 and x2 + 11 x + 30 and find the LCD.
x 2 + 6 x + 5 = (x + 1)(x + 5)
x 2 + 11 x + 30 = (x + 6)(x + 5)
LCD = (x + 1)(x + 5)(x + 6)
We also factor the numerators.
x 2 + 3 x + 2 = (x + 1)(x + 2)
x 2 + 4 x - 12 = (x + 6)(x - 2)
We rewrite the given expression with numerators and denominators in
factored form and simplify if possible.

207

42. Answer: D.
Apply the multiplication rule.

Factor if possible

Simplify if possible

43. Answer: C.
We first convert (x - 2) into a rational expression. Hence

The division of two rational expressions is done by multiplying the first
208

by the reciprocal of the second as follows (see divison rule above).
Hence

Multiply numerators and denominators (multiplication rule) but do not
expand.

Factor the terms - 2 x + 4 included in the numerator as follows:
- 2 x + 4 = -2(x - 2)
and use - 2 x + 4 in factored form in the rational expression to simplify

44. Answer: D.
Use the distributive property of multiplication. 3(1) − 3(3x) ≥ −3(x) −
3(27)
Simplify terms. 3 − 9x ≥ −3x − 81
Add 9x to both sides. 3 − 9x + 9x ≥ 9x − 3x − 81
Combine like terms. 3 ≥ 6x − 81
Add 81 to both sides of the inequality. 3 + 81 ≥ 6x − 81 + 81
Combine like terms. 84 ≥ 6x
209

Divide both sides of the inequality by 6.
Simplify. 14 ≥ x

45. Answer: C.
Multiply the exponents of each factor inside the parentheses by the
exponent outside the parentheses.
32x2y10 – 11x2y242y8
Use the commutative property of multiplication.
32x2y10 – 11 × 42x2y2y8
When similar factors, or bases, are multiplied, add the exponents of
the variables.
32x2y10 – 11 × 16 x2y10
Evaluate numerical factors.
9x2y10 – 176x2y10
Combine like terms.
−167x2y10

46. Answer: A.
This expression can be factored using the trinomial method.

210

The factors of v4 are (v2)(v2), and the factors of 48 are (1)(48) or
(2)(24) or (3)(16) or (4)(12) or (6)(8).
Only the product of a positive and a negative numerical term will result
in −48. The only factors of 48 that can be added or subtracted in any
way to equal 13 are 3 and 16.
Use 3 and 16 and a positive and negative sign in the terms of the
trinomial factors. Check your answer using FOIL.
(v2 + 3)(v2 − 16) = v4 − 16v2 + 3v2 − 48 = v4 − 13v – 48
You may notice that one of the two factors of the trinomial expression
can itself be factored. The second term is the difference of two perfect
squares.
Factor (v2 − 16) using the form for factoring the difference of two
perfect squares.
(v + 4)(v − 4) = v2 − 4v + 4v − 16 = v2 – 16
This now makes the complete factorization of v 4 − 13v2 − 48 = (v2 +
3)(v + 4)(v − 4).

47. Answer: D.
For this expression, use the product property of radicals and combine
the factors in the radicand and outside the radical signs.
(9

)(3a

) = 9 x 3a

= 27a

211

= 27a x ab = 27a2b

48. Answer: D.
A line, a line segment, and a ray are sets of points. How many points
make a set? An infinite number. Since a limit cannot be put on infinity,
not one of the answer choices has more than the other.
49. Answer: D.
Always assume that in plane geometry a line is a straight line unless
otherwise stated. Process of elimination works well with this question:
Lines have one dimension, length, and no substance; they are
definitely not solid. Lines extend to infinity; they are not finite. Finally,
we defined noncollinear as a set of points that “do not line up”; we
take our cue from the last part of that statement. Choice c is not our
answer.
50. Answer: D.
Collinear points are also coplanar. Choice a is not the answer
because noncollinear points determine planes, not a single line of
collinear points.
51. Answer: B.
A line segment is the shortest distance between any two points.
52. Answer: B.
16 – x2 ≥ 0
x2 – 16 ≤ 0 → (x – 4)(x + 4) ≤ 0 → -4 ≤ x ≤ 4

212

53. Answer: B.

A = LW
(6
)(2 )
12 (3) = 36
54. Answer: B.
P = 2L + 2W
L = (P – 2W) ÷ 2
= [(16x + 8y) – 2 (5x – 2y)] ÷ 2
= [16x + 8y – 10x + 4y] ÷ 2
= [6x + 12y] ÷ 2
L = 3x + 6y
55. Answer: C.
Because we are provided only the ratio of boys to girls, we can provide
our own number of boys and girls so long as it satisfies the provided
ratio. We will assume there are 10 girls, which means there are 20
boys. Now, ¾ of the boys would be 15 and ½ of the girls would be 5.
The ratio of 15:5 is 3:1.
56. Answer: A.
1st: 7:00 A.M., Sunday
2nd: 2:00 P.M., Sunday
3rd: 9:00 P.M., Sunday
4th: 4:00 A.M., Monday
5th: 11:00 A.M., Monday
6th: 6:00 P.M., Monday
213

57. Answer: A.
Red = x
Green = 3x
White = 2(3x) = 6x
Total: 10x
P(white) =

=

58. Answer: C.
- kx + k = 0 → a = , b = - k, c = k
It has two real roots if b2 – 4ac > 0
(- k)2 – 4( )(k) > 0 → k2 – 4 > 0 → (k – 2)(k + 2) > 0 → k < - 2 or k > 2
59. Answer: D
The most straightforward method for solving problems of this type is to
begin by supplying our own initial value prior to any increase or
decrease in profits. Because percents are essentially a division by
100, choosing 100 as our starting value for any percent problem is
wise. We are told that for the first year, the percent rose by 12%, so:
100 * 0.12 = 12
So at the start of 2011, the company now has 112, for which there is
another increase of 18%, so:
112 * 0.18 = 20.16
Final amount in 2012 = 112 + 20.16 = 132.16
To find the overall percent increase, we find the total increase, then
divide this value by the original amount, so:
132.16 − 100 = 32.16
32.16 ÷ 100 = 0.32
214

= 32%.
60. Answer: D.
92x + 5 = 81x + 1 → 92x + 5 = (92)x + 1
→ 92x + 5 = (9)2x + 2
2x + 5 = 2x + 2
5 = 2 (no solution)
61. Answer: C.
In order to find the average of the set of solutions, we must first solve
the inequality:
−6 < −2x + 4 < 6
→ −10 < −2x < 2
→ 5 > x > −1
There are a few things to remember when working with absolute
values and inequalities. In order to eliminate the absolute value lines,
we must be sure that we are considering both the positive and
negative distance from 0 in the inequality, an easy way to take care of
this is to remove the absolute value lines and treat the expression as
if it is also greater than the opposite of the value it is smaller than, for
example: −6 < −2x + 4 < 6.
Another important thing to remember is that when multiplying or
dividing an inequality by a negative value, we must switch the
directions of any/all inequality signs, for example:

Now that we have the solution set, we can find its average by
summing the extreme values and dividing by 2:

215

62. Answer: A.
Three noncollinear points determine a plane. In this case, we know
level X is a plane and Ann, Bill, and Carl represent points on that
plane. Ann and Bill together are not enough points to define the plane;
Dan isn’t on plane X and choice d doesn’t make sense. Choice a is
the only option.

63. Answer: D.
Unlike a plane, an office floor can hold only so many people; however,
imagine the office floor extending infinitely in every direction. How
many people could it hold? An infinite number.

64. Answer: D.
Just as the office floor can represent a plane, Ann and Bill can
represent points. They acquire the characteristics of a point; and as
we know, points have no dimension, and two points make a line.

65. Answer: B.
Ann, Bill, and Carl are all on the same floor, which means they are all
on the same plane, and they are not lined up. That makes them
noncollinear but coplanar.

216

66. Answer: D.
Carl and Dan represent two points; two points make a line; and all
lines are collinear and coplanar. Granted, Dan and Carl are on two
different floors; but remember points exist simultaneously on multiple
planes.
67. Answer: C.
The first term a1 is 2 and the common difference is equal to: 5 - 2 = 8 5=3
Hence using the formula for the nth term, a n = a1 + (n - 1)d to the term
equal to 227, we can write the equation:
227 = 2 + (n - 1)3
Solve the above for n
n - 1 = (227 - 2) / 3 = 75 and n = 76
The 76th term is equal to 227.
68. Answer: D.
The first term a1 = 9 and d = 2 (the difference between any two
consecutive odd integers). Hence the sum Sn of the n terms may be
written as follows
Sn = (n/2)[2*a1 + (n - 1)d] = 15,960
With a1 = 9 and d=2, the above equation in n may be written as
follows
n2 + 8 n - 15860 = 0
217

Solve the above for n
n = 122 and n = -130
The solution to the problem is that 122 consecutive odd numbers
must be added in order to obtain a sum of 15,860.
69. Answer: B.
Let r be the radius of the semicircle. Area of the semicircle is known;
hence
1250Pi = (1/2) Pi r2 (note the 1/2 because of the semicircle)
Solve for r: r = 50
Length of rectangle = 2r = 100 (semicircle inscribed)
Width of rectangle = r = 50 (semicircle inscribed)
Area = 100 * 50 = 5000
70. Answer: A
A probability is always greater than or equal to 0 and less than or
equal to 1, hence only A above cannot represent probabilities.
71. Answer: C.
We construct a table of frequencies for the the blood groups as
follows
group frequency
a
50
218

B
O
AB

65
70
15

We use the empirical formula of the probability
Frequency for O blood
________________________________________________
P(E)=
Total frequencies
= 70 / 200 = 0.35

72. Answer: D.
To solve this, set x = 100 and perform the operations. One hundred is
a great number to choose here because 1% of 100 is 1.
100 − 0.4 * 100 = 60
60 + 0.25 * 60 = 75
Because x = 100 was our initial value, we want to choose the answer
choice that gives us 75 when we substitute 100 for x, 0.75 * 100 = 75,
so answer choice (D) is correct.

73. Answer: B.
Recall order of operations and the distributive property to answer this
question. The second bracket simplifies to z − x + y and to this we
multiply (x + y). Begin by distributing the x through (z − x + y) and to
this add the distribution of y through (z − x + y) to get the answer.

219

74. Answer: C.
The probability of selecting a red marble on the first draw is 10⁄32
because there are 10 red marbles and 32 total marbles. After
removing the first red marble there are now 9 red marbles and 31 total
marbles left so 9⁄31 chance of selecting the second red marble. To
find the probability of both events occurring, we multiply the
probabilities to get 9 * 10⁄32 * 31 which reduces to 45⁄496.
75. Answer: B.
We can either use the system of equations to solve for x and y
individually to find that x = 5 and y = 2 which gives 25 − 4 = 21, or we
can see that if we multiply (x + y) and (x − y) we will be left with x2 −
y2, 7 * 3 = 21.
76. Answer: D.
Recall that the circumference is the distance around a circle. If the
cake is divided into 12 equal slices, each arc length will be 5.
Summing 5 of these slices will give 25.
77. Answer: A.
To solve this problem we will substitute (x + h) for every x in our
function ƒ(x):
ƒ(x +h) = (x +h)2 + 2(x +h) + 2.
Evaluate the expression using the distributive property to arrive at:
x2 + 2x + 2xh + 2h + h2 + 2.
78. Answer: C.

220

Since vertical angles are congruent, the angle vertical to the 35degree angle also has a measure of 35 degrees. The supplement of
the 120-degree angle has a measure of 60 degrees, so we then have
a triangle with angles measuring 35, 60, and x degrees, as shown in
the figure provided. Since the angles of a triangle add to 180 degrees:
35 + 60 + x = 180
x = 180 − 35 − 60
x = 85 degrees
79. Answer: C.
Recall that when provided with a point and the slope of a line, we can
use point-slope formula to write an equation for the line. The point
slope formula is y − y1 = m(x − x1) where (x1, y1) is the point
provided and m is the slope. Plug in the point and slope provided and
solve for y:
y − 3 = −⅓ (x − 2)
y = −⅓x +

80. Answer: C.
Recall midpoint formula is the average of the x values and the
average of the y values in (x,y) coordinate form.
First find the x coordinate midpoint:
(10 + (−2)) ÷ 2
=4
Then find the y coordinate midpoint:
(9 + (−4)) ÷ 2
=2.5
Add them together to get the sum:
4 + 2.5 = 6.5

221

81. Answer: D.
In approaching this problem, consider the number of options the
students have for each role. As a role is taken up, there is 1 less
student to fill the next role. For President there are 6 options, for Vice
President 5 options, for Secretary 4 options, and for Treasurer 3
options. Multiply each of these to find 360 different groups:
6 * 5 * 4 * 3 = 360
82. Answer: B.
Solve this by process of elimination.
A: True: AB and EF are both perpendicular to line BCF.
C: True: Angle F is a right angle, so the two lines are perpendicular.
D: True: Angle BCA and angle DCF are vertical angles, so they must
be equal.
E: True: Angle ABC = angle CDF (they are both right angles).
Angle BCA = angle DCF (see statement D). Therefore, angle BAC
must equal angle DFC (since the other two angles are equal, and the
three angles total to 180). Since the two triangles have three
corresponding angles, they are similar. B can be false.
Although we know that triangles ABC and CDF are similar, we do not
know that they are congruent. So these sides may be unequal.
83. Answer: A.
Recall that the angles of a triangle sum to 180 degrees:
3x + 10 + −2x + 40 + x + 40 = 180
2x + 90 = 180
2x = 90
x = 45
222

84. Answer: C.
Begin by rounding the number to the nearest hundredth: 89.88. Now
add the tenths place, 8, and the hundredths, 8, to get 16.
85. Answer: C.
Use an equation to represent the situation, x + x + 2 + x + 4 + x + 6 =
36. Solve for x to find 6, but recognize that this is the smallest integer
in the set, the 3rd largest would be 10.
86. Answer: A.
Because we are presented with a pie chart, we know the percentages
spent on each department will add up to 100%, meaning the
remaining expenditures represent 26% of all expenditures. We can
set up a proportion between the 19% spent on R&D and the 26%
spent on others. 19/26 = x/12,250. Cross multiply to solve for x to find
8951.9 which rounds to 8952.
87. Answer: A.
Note that logbbx = x, logbb0 = 0 and logb1 = 0
log 16x = log8 1 = 0
log 16x = 0
16x = 100 = 1
16x = 160
x=0
88. Answer: B.
As this question requires a couple spatial relationships, it may prove
useful to draw a picture representing the situation. We are given that
the diameter, which is the same as the diagonal of a cube, is equal to
223

5 inches. We also know that the diagonal of a cube is the hypotenuse
of the right triangle constructed from one of the cube’s side lengths as
well as the diagonal of one of the square faces of the cube.
Using this information we will set up an equation for the known
relationships (Pythagorean’s Theorem) before solving for the target
variable s, which represents the cube’s side length. We know that the
hypotenuse of a cube’s square face is s√2 (recall that 45°, 45°, 90°
right triangles have a side length relationship of x, x, x√2). We also
know that one side length of the cube is s. Consequently:

However, this answer choice is not found, so we must remove the
radical from the denominator:

89. Answer: C.
Find n:
an = a1 + (n – 1)d
-29 = 91 + (n-1)(-6)
6(n – 1) = 91 + 29
n – 1 = 120 ÷ 6
n = 21
S = sum
= n (a1 + an) ÷ 2
224

= 21 (91 + [- 29]) ÷ 2
= 21 (62) ÷ 2
= 21 (31)
S = 651
90. Answer: D.
Since in this case the number of scores is even, the median is the
average of the two middlemost scores.
median =
=
= 50.5
91. Answer: A.
Recall that the x-intercept of a function is where the function output
ƒ(x) = 0. So we begin by setting our function equal to 0 and solving for
the target variable x:
ƒ(x) = 0 = x³ + 3x² − x − 3
The problem here is that we are most familiar with solving for x when
given a linear or a quadratic function and may not easily recall how to
factor polynomials of degree 3. However, with some rearranging of
terms, we may get a better idea of how to proceed:
(x³ + 3x²) + (−x − 3)
→ x²(x + 3) − 1(x + 3)
→ (x + 3)(x² − 1) = 0
By grouping our terms together we can find commonalities to factor
out to finally arrive at an expression that enables us to directly solve
for x. Setting each of the parentheses equal to 0:
x + 3 = 0, x² − 1 = 0
→ x = −3, x = −1, x = 1
Recall that x² − 1 is a difference of squares.
Alternatively, if ‘a’ is a root of a polynomial function, then ƒ(a) = 0. We
can plug the answer choices into the function to see which answer
choice has three values that all yield zero when plugged into the
function. Only answer choice (A) works.

225

92. Answer: C.
The number of ways of arranging n objects in a round table is (n – 1)!
Ways. For the five students the number of arrangements is (5 – 1)! =
4! = 24
93. Answer: B.
Solve this problem by setting up a proportion. We are told the ratio of
milk to juice is 13:x and that there are 39 milk and 18 juice so → 13/x
= 39/18, cross multiply and solve for x to get 6.

94. Answer: B.
=

-

=

-

= csc2 – cot2 = 1

95. Answer: C.
Here we are required to initially substitute the known values of a and
b into the expressions provided before finding the difference.
Substituting the values of a and b into the first expression gives:
(−13)(4) + 3(4)
= −4 + 12
=8
Substituting the values of a and b into the second expression gives:
(−13)(4) + 3(4)0
= −4 + 3(1)
= −4 + 3
= −1
The difference between the two expressions is 8 − (−1) = 9
Recall that any number (other than 0) to the 0 power is 1 and that
subtracting a negative is the same as adding.
226

96. Answer: B.
Evaluate the expression to find the most simplified form. First
evaluate the coefficients:
4 * 2 * 1⁄3 * 1⁄4 = 2⁄3
x * x2 = x3
y * y2 * y 2 = y5
z * z3 * z = z 5
Combine each of these terms to get answer choice (B).

97. Answer: C.
=

=

=

= 8 : 27

98. Answer: C.
=

→ 2(a + b +c) = 3 (a + b) → 2a + 2b + 2c = 3a + 3b → 2c

=a+b→c=

99. Answer: B.
Let n be the number of tickets.
227

n=4+

+ 12 + 15 → n =

+ 31 → 2n = n – 4 + 62 → n = 58

100. Answer: B.
Let x = original number of candies
Catherine: x
Farah: x
Wendy: 4
Jane: 100
x = x + x + 4 + 100
x = x + x + 104
30x = 5x + 12x + 3120
13x = 3120
x = 240

228

9
Reading Answer Key
1. A

18. B
10. B

2. C

19. D
11. D

3. B

20. B
12. C

4. C

21. C
13. C

5. D

22. A
14. D

6. B

23. D
15. C

7. D

24. B
16. B

8. A

25. D
17. D

9. C

26. C
229

27. A

40. A

53. B

28. D

41. C

54. B

29. B

42. B

55. C

30. C

43. A

56. D

31. A

44. C

57. B

32. D

45. D

58. A

33. A

46. A

59. D

34. B

47. C

60. B

35. D

48. B

61. D

36. D

49. A

62. A

37. B

50. D

63. C

38. B

51. D

64. B

39. A

52. D
230

65. C
78. D
66. D

91. B

79. A
92. C

67. B

80. C
93. C

68. C

81. D
94. D

69. C

82. A
95. A

70. D

83. B
96. B

71. A

84. B

72. C

85. C

97. C
98. C
73. A

86. B

74. B

87. B

75. D

88. B

99. A
100. A
101. D
76. C

89. C

77. B

90. C

102. C

231

103. B

116. B

129. D

104. D

117. A

130. C

105. A

118. B

131. B

106. D

119. A

132. A

107. D

120. B

133. D

108. A

121. C

134. C

122. D

135. B

123. C

136. A

124. A

137. D

125. B

138. C

126. C

139. B

127. A

140. A

128. D

141. C

109. B
110. A
111. B
112. B
113. D
114. A
115. C

232

142. D

145. D
148. C

143. B

146. A
149. C

144. C

147. C

233

